Regimes of Scale in AI Meteorology
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract.
1
Introduction
2
Background
2.1
Application Domain, Knowledge Domain, and Infrastructure for Domains
2.2
Meteorological ”Big Data” and the US Weather Enterprise
2.3
AI/ML ”Big Data” and Foundation Models
2.4
Intersections of Meteorological and AI/ML Scale
3
Methods
3.1
Positionality Statement
4
Findings
4.1
Scaling Observations: Predictability in Air/Ground Observations
4.2
Scaling Data: Satellite Data and Reanalysis Data
4.2.1
ERA-5 and ”Reanalysis Data”
4.2.2
Satellite and other remote sensing data
4.3
Scaling Models: Ensembles and ”Physical Consistency”
4.3.1
Speed and Resolution: AI/ML Scale without Meteorological Scale
4.3.2
Interdisciplinary Use
5
Discussion
5.1
Regimes of Scale: AI/ML in Friction with Rival Big Datas
5.2
Social Infrastructures of Scale: What Makes ”Good Data?”
6
Conclusion
References
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2604.06000v1 [cs.HC] 07 Apr 2026
Regimes of Scale in AI Meteorology
Anya Martin
0000-0002-9592-4024
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta
USA
amartin388@gatech.edu
and
Cindy Lin
clin646@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta
Georgia
USA
(26 Aug 2025)
Abstract.
HCI work has explored the effective integration of AI/ML tools across ”application domains” from healthcare to finance to transportation. We add to this literature with an analysis of AI/ML tools in meteorology, a domain that already uses ”big data” and massive physics-based models. Drawing from 12 interviews with forecasters and meteorologists with varied connections to AI/ML weather modeling, we trace tensions in AI/ML weather application arising from what we call ”regimes of scale,” different ways that AI/ML and meteorological regimes make observations, data, and models scale. Rather than seeing AI/ML as a domain-agnostic tool, we argue that AI/ML methods were born from specific platform and internet infrastructures, and so they can struggle to integrate with very different (in this case meteorological) ways of organizing data pipelines.
Artificial intelligence, Meteorology, Scale, Interview study
†
†
copyright:
acmlicensed
†
†
journalyear:
2025
†
†
doi:
XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
†
†
conference:
Designing Interactive Systems; October 2026; USA
†
†
isbn:
978-1-4503-XXXX-X/2018/06
†
†
ccs:
Human-centered computing HCI theory, concepts and models
1.
Introduction
HCI work has explored the effective integration of AI/ML tools across ”application domains” from healthcare
(Yoo
et al.
,
2025
)
to finance
(Wang
et al.
,
2025
)
to transportation
(Yildirim
et al.
,
2023
)
to ”investigative data journalism” and ”legal analysis”
(Showkat and Baumer,
2022
)
. These domains, alongside their ”domain knowledge” and ”domain experts,” form the application space for AI/ML tools and methods. As David Ribes argues, the term ”domain” defines ”spheres of worldly action or knowledge” traversed by highly mobile ”domain independent” methods
(Ribes
et al.
,
2019
)
, previously data science and currently AI/ML. HCI studies of AI-in-practice have focused on two major sites of friction: general AI frameworks and their conflicts with ”specialized user needs”
(Guri
t
,
ă and Vatavu,
2025
; Yoo
et al.
,
2025
)
, and general AI ways of knowing and their conflicts with domain experts’ situated knowledge and values
(Jung
et al.
,
2022
,
2024
)
. We focus on a third site of friction: differences in
regimes of scale
between AI/ML and the ”outside world.” What sorts of things scale? What does it take to scale technoscientific objects (observation networks, data, models)? What are we scaling
to
? By focusing on meteorology, a domain which already has ”big data” and global physics-based models, we find profound design and application frictions
despite
surface-level similarities between established physics-based and novel AI/ML-based weather models. Both meteorology and AI/ML have ”observations,” ”data,” and ”models,” but these observations/data/models operate under different
regimes of scale
: AI/ML through an
entrepenurial
scale which forms closed loops between massive user data and massive models, and meteorology through a
state
scale that connects regional and national observations/data/models to form ”global” scale, what Paul Edwards calls ”infrastructural globalism”
(Edwards,
2006
)
.
Scale consistently appears as a key term in AI/ML research and practice: GPT-4 was reported as ”large-scale, multimodal model”
(OpenAI
et al.
,
2023
)
trained on an ”unprecedented scale of compute and data”
(Bubeck
et al.
,
2023
)
, and this scale has been directly linked to the ”sparks of artificial general intelligence” cited in a sister report by a group of Microsoft employees
(Bubeck
et al.
,
2023
)
. These large-scale model claims are closely entwined with the actual deployment of AI/ML methods in tech startups, which draw on an entrepreneurial regime of scale by which ”the value and meaning of scale is usually taken to be obvious: companies aspire to capture more users, to grow their market valuations, and to increase the amount of data they collect and analyze”
(Seaver,
2021
)
. Large-scale user numbers produce large-scale data to fuel large-scale models: by entwining AI/ML models with the data they train from, these models ”scale” with their startups towards ”a critical turning point,” ”a qualitative, categorical, and transformative change”
(Wong,
2023
)
. This is what we call
entrepreneurial scale
, a mode of scaling which makes strong demands on AI/ML observations, data, and models in order to ”scale” them alongside the explosive growth and anticipated monopoly power of their tech startups. But crucially,
this is not the only way to scale
, and as AI/ML methods spread beyond the sphere of control of large tech companies, they face new and alien forms of scale: most notably, for our paper, the ”state scale” of meteorology. While AI/ML ”entrepreneurial scale” relies on human user data and anticipates ”transformative change” in business and model, the meteorological ”state scale” gathers data to render territory legible across borders, an ”infrastructural globalism”
(Edwards,
2006
)
that coordinates national projects of legibility. This state scale promises ”precision-nested scales” by which observations/data/models ”become big without changing”
(Tsing,
2012
)
, a stark contrast to the transformative change anticipated by entrepreneurial scale
(Wong,
2023
)
.
This paper reframes AI/ML’s entry into established big data fields and sectors, not as a friction between ”general” frameworks and ”specific” user needs or a friction between ”general” AI methods and ”specific” domain knowledges and values, but as an
ongoing friction between two different regimes of scale: in this case, the ”entrepreneurial scale” of AI/ML and the ”state scale” of meteorology.
Focusing on regimes of scale over domains also partially demystifies AI/ML’s domain independence: AI/ML methods were born from the bulk data of platforms and the internet
(Zhang
et al.
,
2024
)
, and so despite their domain agnostic nature, ”scaling up” demands expanding and controlling data flows between individual human users. As novel ”AI weather models” like GraphCast
(Lam
et al.
,
2023
)
and PanguWeather
(Bi
et al.
,
2023
)
interface with established meteorology, which is dependent on remote physical measurements and aims to trace weather and climate at ”global scale”
(Edwards,
2013
)
, AI/ML methods experience intense forms of infrastructural friction. Contact between AI/ML and existing meteorological big data regimes then produces misalignments rooted in different strategies of interfacing with massive data/compute stacks, what we call ”frictions of scale.”
We center our findings on frictions between state and entrepreneurial regimes of scale at three different points in the data pipeline: observations, data, and models. First, regimes of scale operate at the level of
observations
: for instance, weather observations work better for ”global scale” models
the further from the ground they are
, making upper-air observations ”global” while ground observations are associated with smaller-scale, ”localizing” steps (finetuning). This hierarchy of observations fundamentally breaks with AI/ML observational scale, which relies on growing and monitoring dense networks of human users and their generated data. Second, regimes of scale work at the level of
data
, as data negotiates different kinds of error to operate at scale: for meteorology this tradeoff is the ”indirect” nature of satellite observations and the ”synthetic” nature of reanalysis data, which are both actively negotiated in efforts to make data ”AI-ready,” closer to ”observation” even if human-tainted. Finally, meteorological
models
scale via ”charismatic and pedagogical” strategies
(Tsing,
2011
)
, working at global scales by employing persuasive terms and practices such as ”physical consistencies” and strategic ”representations” of the world. AI models, which tend to universalize and become widely adopted via domain-agnostic ”metrics” and ”benchmarks,” can struggle heavily with the spatially and temporally embedded ”representations” of meteorological phenomena that weather/climate models rely on.
This paper contributes to the HCI literature in two ways:
•
First, we expand HCI work on interdisciplinary domain science and data pipelines by tracing frictions between two massive ”big data” systems: AI/ML and physics-based meteorology, both large-scale and interdisciplinary with
fundamentally different regimes of scale
. More specifically, understanding the meteorological sciences both as a ”domain” and as a big data regime with its own application domains challenges the division between domain science and AI/ML, and by extension, the popular portrayal of AI/ML as ”revolutionizing” modern science
(The Economist,
2024
)
.
•
Second, we develop a framework, ”regimes of scale,” to analyze how different data pipelines make observations, data, and models ”scale” differently. The contrast between AI/ML ”entrepreneurial scale” and meteorological ”state scale” produces
frictions of scale
which take shape as the observations, data, and models of the two big data systems intersect. Because meteorology has established ways of building data pipelines and making them ”scale,” many of our observed frictions were caused not by technical insufficiency but by basic epistemic and infrastructural differences in how observations/data/models ”should” be scaled up – in short, frictions in regimes of scale.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: First, we begin by providing a comprehensive background of the history of ”AI application” work in HCI [2.1], a review of both regimes of scale (meteorology [2.2] and AI/ML [2.3]), and a background of the last two years of contact between the regimes [2.4]. Second, we detail the methods of our interview study. Third, we map frictions between the AI/ML and meteorological regimes of scale at three points in the meteorological ”data pipeline:” observations, data, and models. Finally, in our discussion and conclusion, we extend Anna Tsing’s theory of ”multiple, divergent globalisms” to analyze frictions of scale as conflicts between rival ways of building and organizing Big Data. Because meteorology has ”application domains” of its own, with established ways of interfacing with data subjects, infrastructure sources, and ”domain-specific” users, AI/ML applications necessarily reckon with not just ”domain knowledge” but established ways of scaling big data.
2.
Background
This paper studies the use of AI in meteorology as a friction between two distinct regimes of scale, the ”state scale” of meteorology and the ”entrepreneurial scale” of AI/ML methods. Modern AI/ML grew from platform and Internet data and is defined by intellectual monopolies on AI/ML software (Pytorch, Tensorflow), infrastructural compute (AWS, Microsoft Azure), and hardware (GPUs), tying modern AI/ML methods to an
entrepreneurial scale
by which ”companies aspire to capture more users, to grow their market valuations, and to increase the amount of data they collect and analyze”
(Seaver,
2021
)
. In contrast to the meteorological
state scale
, which anticipates ”precision-nested” global scales where observations/data/models ”can become big without changing”
(Tsing,
2012
)
, entrepreneurial scale anticipates an explosive ”large scale” or ”scaled” state incommensurable with smaller scales, a fundamental shift in the tech company and its AI/ML models towards new economic frontiers and absurd profits
(Wong,
2023
)
. Ultimately, our qualitative interview study aims to advance ongoing HCI conversations on the relationship between domains and AI/ML by better qualifying what constitutes a domain science, especially when both AI/ML and meteorological regimes have massive datasets and attempt to scale up globally.
2.1.
Application Domain, Knowledge Domain, and Infrastructure for Domains
This work contributes to the HCI literature on AI/ML and data-scientific interactions with ”domains,” which serve three roles for HCI: domains have application points, expert knowledge, and end users. The most straightforward use is domain as an ”application domain,” which typically ties a wide range of different domains into some overarching study of AI/ML data pipelines
(Guri
t
,
ă and Vatavu,
2025
; Yildirim
et al.
,
2023
; Kim
et al.
,
2024
; Shin
et al.
,
2025
; Yang
et al.
,
2020
)
. For example, Hohman et. al theorize ”data iteration” in AI/ML by pulling from interviewees across ”diverse ML domains” including NLP, computer vision, and ”Applied ML + Systems”
(Hohman
et al.
,
2020
)
. Likewise, Sambasivan et. al’s study of ”high-stakes domains” merges healthcare, food/agriculture, environment/climate, and more to study ”data cascades” via interviews of AI practitioners
(Sambasivan
et al.
,
2021
)
. Even within specific domains like healthcare, ”domain application” can be used to work across different subdomains: for example, in their study of public health datafication, Thakkar et. al use ”application domain” to split public health into project domains including ”Maternal Health,” ”Sexual Health,” and ”Other”
(Thakkar
et al.
,
2022
)
. The split across ”application domains” generally originates in domain-agnostic interviewees (data scientists, data managers) who may tack across many domains or subdomains, and this naturally leads to a focus on comparatively domain-agnostic components of data pipelines, which per Jung et. al can yield research which ”views data science systems as centered on the development of statistical models or algorithms by technical data scientists, with domain experts limited to the role of informers”
(Jung
et al.
,
2024
)
.
Efforts to address this issue have leaned on another use of domain, that of domain as ”domain knowledge”
(Calota
et al.
,
2025
)
. Domain knowledge is fundamentally tied to the figure of the ”domain expert” who holds it, and it has been used in HCI to advocate for further participation of domain experts in data science work
(Alvarado Garcia
et al.
,
2025
)
. The precise benefit of domain expert participation varies. For Jung et. al it improves ”the actionability of data science systems”
(Jung
et al.
,
2024
)
, for Bhattacharya et. al it can help decrease representation bias
(Bhattacharya
et al.
,
2025
)
, and for Sambasivan et. al acknowledging domain expertise is simultaneously an ethical question (given the deskilling of domain expertise in low-resource areas) and a practice which ”successfully sets up the AI engineering fundamentals of getting consistently good quality data, timely feedback on deployments, and confidence in building solutions”
(Sambasivan and Veeraraghavan,
2022
)
. Finally, Freeman et. al study domain experts’ answering strategies in order to use ”domain expertise” as a resource for making LLMs useful ”even when users’ lack of domain knowledge impedes question formulation [when prompting LLMs]”
(Freeman
et al.
,
2025
)
.
Other HCI works use ”domain expert” to study interactions between ”data scientists” and ”domain experts” in organizational settings, or to study interactions between domain experts and data-scientific tools (as ”users”)
(Burton and Jackson,
2012
; Lee
et al.
,
2024
; Zhong
et al.
,
2025
)
. Mao et. al study teams of bio-medical scientists collaborating with data scientists, and frames their work in terms of ”interdisciplinary collaborations;” bio-medical and data scientists had to ”find common ground” to effectively transform domain-specific biomedical research questions into ”a computable [data science] question”
(Mao
et al.
,
2019
)
. Zhang et. al more broadly consider collaborations between different types of ”data science workers” (engineer, manager, researcher, domain expert, communicator); domain experts ”are active at every stage,” and ”take on even more prominent roles during later stages of evaluating and communicating”
(Zhang
et al.
,
2022
)
. A separate branch of HCI studies domain experts as
users
of data-scientific tools: Ziegler and Chasins study users of geospatial data
(Ziegler and Chasins,
2023
)
, Jung et. al study craft brewers using brew sheet data
(Jung
et al.
,
2022
)
, and Lakier et. al study marine scientists who use data science tools but do not generally consider themselves ”data scientists”
(Lakier
et al.
,
2025
)
. Finally, certain works understand data and data-scientific tools as ”infrastructure” for domains. This is less common in modern HCI compared to the ”cyberinfrastructure” studies of the 2000s (see
(Ribes and Finholt,
2009
; Baker
et al.
,
2005
)
), which often aimed to create or study domain infrastructures at ”scale”
(Ribes,
2014b
,
a
)
1
1
1
While more detached from scholarship on the scientific domains, HCI work on ”scale-making” has also analyzed techno-optimistic developmental
(Avle
et al.
,
2020
)
and activist
(Pei,
2025
)
practices of making scale
, but it continues today: Neang et. al study oceanographic infrastructure
(Neang
et al.
,
2021
,
2023
)
, and Steindhart and Jackson likewise study ”collaborative ocean science”
(Steinhardt and Jackson,
2014
)
. Strikingly, these ”user” and ”infrastructure” studies often operate entirely outside the realm of the domain-agnostic ”data scientist,” who appears only in the data and tools that domain scientists use to work and collaborate.
This paper studies interactions between AI/ML and meteorology via an interview study of 12 forecasters/meteorologists, six of whom are also AI/ML practitioners. Meteorology is kind of a ”domain” for AI/ML application, but simultaneously operates as a big data regime with ”application domains” of its own: disaster management, energy, insurance, and finance, among others. Meteorologists are also a kind of domain expert, but just as in Mao et. al’s study of biomedical collaboration
(Mao
et al.
,
2019
)
, their domain knowledge is simultaneously a kind of data-scientific knowledge centered on meteorological ways of organizing data pipelines. As we will discuss in the next section of this Background, the fundamentally big-data nature of meteorology strains the ”domain science” and ”data science” dichotomy that organizes HCI domain research. This is highly productive for advancing HCI studies of AI/ML applications, particularly given that in recent years AI/ML methods have ventured outside their classic homes in large tech companies, interfacing with regimes of large-scale data that have been organized in very different ways than the internet and platform data classic to AI/ML development.
2.2.
Meteorological ”Big Data” and the US Weather Enterprise
Our object of study is the meteorological big data regime, and specifically the US ”Weather, Water, and Climate Enterprise,” a public-academic-private meteorological assemblage formed via a series of institutional agreements over the 1990s. Since meteorology’s rapid professionalization in the 1960s and 70s concomitant with the rise of general circulation models (GCMs), the field has operated as a kind of national-global science – each country has their own general circulation model, and the national weather agencies (e.g. NOAA in the US, the IMD in India, the CMA in China, the Met Office in Britain) serve central roles in the management of observation networks and the provision of downstream weather services for each country.
Meteorology since the 1970s has rested on General Circulation Models (GCMs), massive differential physics-based models which simulate the circulation of air on a global scale
(Edwards,
2013
)
. Models use ”data assimilation” to pull from a massive range of meteorological observations, from ground stations to radiosonde (balloon) observations to satellite soundings to marine buoy networks
(Edwards,
2013
)
; these observations are then denoised, translated, and combined through the use of other observations or laws under a common assumption of physical consistency, simulating evenly spaced and global ”reanalysis data” such as the ERA-5 dataset
(Pu and Kalnay,
2018
)
. General circulation models predict future weather and climate from these reanalysis datasets, and running them at a high enough resolution to effectively model weather phenomena is extremely computationally expensive; the emergence of general circulation models in the 1970s hinged on the ”availability of supercomputing power”
(Dalmedico,
2001
)
and the ”novel distance and area-integrating powers of satellites”
(Ramage,
1971
)
. Physics-based weather modeling therefore emerged in the context of newly massive data (satellite) and compute infrastructures, and model accuracy has improved incrementally over the last fifty years via the ”quiet revolution” of Moore’s-law computing advances and systematic efforts to mine ”sources of predictability”
(Dalmedico,
2001
)
. State-of-the-art models take hours to run even on NOAA’s massive supercomputing infrastructures; this high CPU requirement has traditionally made it difficult to impossible for private companies to run GCMs for their own use. All this yields an ”infrastructural globalism”
(Edwards,
2006
)
by which world organizations like the WMO mediate data while national meteorological agencies (NOAA, IMD, CMA) organize their own observation, modeling and forecasting networks.
Because meteorological GCMs globally simulate the atmosphere via physical laws, Anna Tsing argues that they mark a ”specific kind of globe” (or, we would say, a distinct regime of global scale) which ”do[es] not purport to describe the globe but rather to picture it in the model.” Rather than ”scaling” via natural laws (like a book of plant classifications), predicting locally while understanding the world globally, for GCMs ”the global scale is the locus of prediction as well as understanding.” Models make global predictions which contain local predictions through ”precision-nested scales” allowing models to ”change the scale without changing the framework of knowledge or action”
(Tsing,
2012
)
. Just as a digital image can seamlessly be zoomed in and out without changing shape due to the conjoined-but-separate nature of pixels
(Tsing,
2012
)
, meteorological models seamlessly tack between local, regional, and national representations through a locally differentiated and spatially integrated global scale. We use
state scale
to refer to this process of precision-nesting (inter)national and spatially-embedded data across different scales. Because meteorology is rooted in national agencies and international collaborations, state scale is deeply tied to what Scott (1998) calls ”high modernist” attempts to render resources and populations ordered and legible
(Scott,
1998
)
. As Scott argues, medieval timber and tax maps defined the shape of the forests and towns they studied; in the same way, meteorological GCMs define the atmosphere through precision-nested models of national territory. State scale is necessarily ”big data” and necessarily makes claims to a global scale rooted in territorial control and international ”infrastructural globalism”
(Edwards,
2006
)
. As we argue in the next section, AI/ML methods have acquired very different ways of ”scaling” that are rooted in the virtual and explosive scaling practices of software-based tech startups.
2.3.
AI/ML ”Big Data” and Foundation Models
While it is difficult to assign AI/ML data infrastructures to a statewide ”national strategy” in the same sense as the US weather enterprise, we maintain that AI/ML methods have an infrastructural ”center” defined by tech monopolies on GPU computing stacks, Pytorch/Tensorflow, ”AI-ready” data, and AI/ML developer expertise. ”AI” as a term was originally (over the 1960s) associated with formal logic algorithms aimed at ”intelligence”
(Minsky,
1961
)
; these methods are now (somewhat pejoratively) known as ”Good Old-Fashioned AI” or GOFAI and bear little resemblance to current practice. Current AI/ML methods were developed over the 1980s and 1990s as signal processing and statistical tools and were used in meteorology in that context
(Elsner and Tsonis,
1992
)
; they have reemerged as vital tools and even ”foundation models” which form the backbone of tech startup and Big Tech algorithmic systems.
The current surge in AI/ML usage, which we call ”modern AI/ML,” is generally traced to the late 2000s and is often attributed to two major data-processing challenges: the 2009 Netflix Challenge, which tasked competitors with effectively recommending movies to users, and the 2012 Imagenet image identification challenge. In each case, the winning AI/ML methods demonstrated that ”supervised machine learning was shockingly effective at predictive pattern recognition when trained using significant computational power and massive amounts of labeled data”
(Whittaker,
2021
)
; Zhang et. al note that prior to 2005, ”given the scarcity of data and computation, strong statistical tools such as kernel methods, decision trees, and graphical models proved empirically superior in many applications”
(Zhang
et al.
,
2024
)
. The key innovation in making AI/ML work was not theory but
infrastructure
: AI/ML methods keyed on ”the availability of massive amounts of data, thanks to the World Wide Web, the advent of companies serving hundreds of millions of users online, a dissemination of low-cost, high-quality sensors, inexpensive data storage (Kryder’s law), and cheap computation (Moore’s law)”
(Zhang
et al.
,
2024
)
. Platform data and cloud computing infrastructures have yielded ”new logics of scale”
(Narayan,
2022
)
which form the foundation of modern AI methods, a kind of epistemic debt that shapes the field in and outside of tech spaces.
AI/ML methods appear ”domain agnostic” in part because they focus on scale over
both domain and data knowledge
. The oft-cited ”bitter lesson” of AI is that ”researchers seek to leverage their human knowledge of the domain,
but the only thing that matters in the long run is the leveraging of computation
”
(Sutton,
2019
)
. The field has largely followed this lesson: ”breakthrough” methods like attention mechanisms
(Vaswani
et al.
,
2023
)
(a key step in LLM creation) were adopted in part
because they scaled
, because unlike deep neural networks (then the dominant method), transformers are comprised of a large number of independent blocks which can be efficiently run on massively parallel GPU stacks. This rejection of ”human knowledge of the domain” for scale makes modern AI/ML methods classically domain-agnostic, but it also ties them to very specific data and compute infrastructures: the Internet, the ”Internet of Things,” platform data, and the large GPU infrastructures of tech companies.
AI/ML methods have a ”center” defined by monopolies on AI/ML software (Pytorch, Tensorflow), infrastructural compute (AWS, Microsoft Azure), and hardware (GPUs). All of these infrastructural components are closely associated with large tech companies and their satellite institutions: Nvidia maintains over a 70% market share on ”advanced AI chips” as of 2023
(Schmid
et al.
,
2024
)
, Meta and Google resource the AI/ML packages PyTorch and Tensorflow
(Widder
et al.
,
2023
)
, and Amazon, Microsoft, and to some extent Google maintain primary control of the services which actually make AI ”scale” to such an extent that the increasing use of AI/ML in finance (circa 2017) was closely entwined with the political-economic ’big techification’ of the financial industry
(Hansen and Thylstrup,
2023
)
.
As such, while we understand AI/ML methods/institutions as a regime of scale analogous to the ”state scale” of meteorological methods and institutions, they are closely entwined with what we refer to as the
entrepreneurial
forms of scale common in tech startups by which ”companies aspire to capture more users, to grow their market valuations, and to increase the amount of data they collect and analyze”
(Seaver,
2021
)
. This is a key component of tech entrepreneurs’ ”arts of scaling:” as Jamie Wong argues, tech entrepreneurs deploy ”growth rituals” that partially disentangle startups from immediate profit in order to promise future growth and a massive ”transformative change” by which startups explode, become large, and suddenly achieve massive profit and massive return on investment
(Wong,
2023
)
. These growth rituals, depicted in ”hockey stick” graphs of massive profit spikes and in anticipation of ”qualitative change” at scale,” depend on the virtual software-centric qualities of tech startups: as Wong notes, ”hardware start-up companies and their products do not easily fulfill the scaling expectations of data technology imaginaries,” as the demands of clinical trials and hardware tests often disrupted AI/ML regimes of scale. We argue that
AI/ML methods are situated in these virtual and tech-entrepreneurial forms of scale
. As we will discuss in the Findings, many of the promises of AI/ML methods – the ability to use ground observations / human data, the ability to personalize predictions, and the nebulous power of ”AI magic” – all draw from the differences between meteorological precision-nested ”state scale” and the tech-entrepreneurial scale of AI/ML methods. Unlike Facebook or Twitter, a weather app can’t improve its weather predictions with more user data –
but if it could!
2.4.
Intersections of Meteorological and AI/ML Scale
We have established this paper’s two ”regimes of scale:” the state scale of national meteorology, and the entrepreneurial scale of modern big tech AI/ML methods. The first significant contact between these regimes occurred in 2022, with an initial wave of AI weather models created by skilled AI/ML research groups in large tech companies: FourCastNet from NVIDIA
(Pathak
et al.
,
2022
)
, Pangu-Weather from Huawei Cloud
(Bi
et al.
,
2023
)
, and GraphCast from Google DeepMind
(Lam
et al.
,
2023
)
. Many of these AI/ML teams did not have a ”meteorologist in the room;” weather was essentially a time series data problem, or more cynically a ”fun science experiment.” Due to this institutional gap, meteorological interest in AI/ML modeling progressed slowly over 2023 and 2024, with a turning point per A1’s fieldwork being the American Meteorological Society conference in January 2024. Prior to this point, meteorological colleagues at our previous institution, an R1 research institution, appeared interested but detached from AI/ML methods; afterwards, they were confronted by them, for good or ill. This paper’s interviews, conducted in summer 2025, took place 2-3 years after the release of these major AI/ML weather models, during an ongoing push to include ”domain experts” by creating integrated meteorologist-data-scientist teams, and a simultaneous push to create ”direct-from-observations” AI/ML models which fully bypassed the meteorological data processing / denoising pipeline.
Using meteorology as a crucial case study, we propose a framework, ”regimes of scale,” which we argue effectively describes the frictions between the AI/ML and meteorological Big Data regimes. In doing so, we contribute to existing HCI literature on domains, which has studied domains as ”applications” for data science, has proposed integrating domain knowledge into data science, and has studied data-scientific tools as basic infrastructures to be used by domain scientists. Rather than operating as a kind of exchange, where the domain scientist has ”domain knowledge” and the data scientist has ”data pipelines” or ”infrastructure,” our study shows a case of AI/ML methods coming into contact with a field with a preexisting and massive physics-based schema of observation assimilation, data reanalysis, and model prediction. Rather than appearing as a distinct scientific field or a single set of methods, the AI/ML regime appears to many interviewees as an ambivalent promise at all levels of the meteorological data pipeline. Scale-making is simultaneously scientific and infrastructural, and as our Findings show, AI/ML is hardly intruding on virgin, ”unscaled” soil: it must displace existing spatial logics of scale-making that have organized meteorology for the last fifty years.
3.
Methods
This work draws from 12 interviews conducted by A1 with public, private, and academic members of the US ”weather enterprise,” a public-private-academic assemblage that has defined US meteorological research and applications since roughly 1990. Participants were recruited from a 2025 conference attended by forecasters, public/private meteorologists, and downstream ”users” of weather data (in energy, disaster management, etc). The general public/private/academic breakdown of the 12 participants is as follows: one academic meteorologist, two meteorologists in government labs, one operational forecaster, and eight private meteorologists (three startup members, five meteorologists at established met obs/data companies). The informants had an average of 22.5 years working in their expert domain (min. 1, max. 45), although this distribution is binomial – interviewees with AI/ML experience skewed younger and were also more likely to have been involved in non-meteorological work. The study aimed to sample both well-established meteorologists integrating AI into existing private/public infrastructures (six, average experience 29.5 years) and the ”Pi-shaped people”
(Ribes
et al.
,
2019
)
(generally younger) who were known as having both AI/ML and meteorological expertise (six, average experience 15.5 years). The interviews ranged from 30 minutes to 1.5 hours; most were around an hour. Interviews were performed in a semi-structured manner that worked from interviewees’ specific subject matter experience within the US ”weather enterprise;” they included discussions of past ”paradigm shifts” in US meteorology (e.g, the 1995 reorganization), public/private/academic relations, and how the interviewees had experienced current and anticipated future changes from AI/ML.
3.1.
Positionality Statement
Our team consists of A1, a graduate student, and A2, a faculty member at the same R1 academic institution in the United States. The first author is a US social scientist trained in AI/ML statistical theory who has interfaced with meteorologists in and outside of the Global North since 2023; her US citizen status played a significant role in studying and interviewing the unusually privatized (for meteorology) weather-water-climate assemblage in the United States. The second author is a US-based ethnographer who has spent more than a decade studying environmental data infrastructures and governance in Southeast Asia and the U.S., allowing her to engage with environmental and earth scientists, including meteorologists and remote sensing scientists, who have attempted to make their datasets more AI- and ML-ready. At the same time, she acknowledges that her longstanding ethnographic experience with such experts stems largely from a particular moment in time (2015 - 2022) where Generative AI and fears of displacement were less prevalent. As such, together with A1, we aimed to hold both ethnographic and fieldwork periods side by side, examining the tensions, alignments, and contradictions that arose from analyzing the interviews together.
4.
Findings
…no model is perfect, not even an AI model, because the data that’s going into it is questionable, right? Always, that’s always been the case [P1].
AI/ML methods are not new to meteorology – because of global climate’s reputation as a highly chaotic system, meteorological works like Elsner and Tonis (1992) had tested neural networks in meteorology as early as the 1990s
(Elsner and Tsonis,
1992
)
, and the 2000s and 2010s are scattered with various applications of AI/ML methods as powerful semi-statistical tools suitable for highly nonlinear systems
(Kumar
et al.
,
2012
; Singh and Borah,
2013
; Dibike and Coulibaly,
2006
; Wang
et al.
,
2018
)
. After all, meteorology was already a ”big data” system that extensively used statistical methods: AI/ML maxims like ”garbage in, garbage out” [P1], the strategic use of ”domain agnostic” methods [P4], and the difficulty of grading models on single ”loss” metrics [P9] could all be seen as existing problems that had already been negotiated in meteorology. As P9 noted, ”we need an underwriter’s lab for AI evaluation… but we need the same thing with tomorrow.io [a satellite observation company].”
Figure 1.
The meteorological ”data pipeline,” loosely split into observations, data, and models.
Figure 1. Four boxes titled ”Observations,” ”Data,” ”Models,” and ”Data.” The ”Observations” box contains five seven bubbles: Satellite, Balloon, Airplane, Radar, Buoy, Ground Station, and Portable Sensors. The ”Data” box contains Reanalysis data and Remote sensing data. The ”Models” box contains ”Global climate,” ”Global weather,” and ”Regional” bubbles, stacked vertically, with each bubble pointing to the one below it. The second ”Data” box contains ”Long-range climate,” ”Short-range weather,” and ”Hazard” bubbles, representing different kinds of data products produced by models. Finally, there is an ”Applications (also data)” box spanning the bottom of the figure, containing ”Short-range (worker safety),” ”Mid-range (water resources),” and ”Long-range (insurance)” applications. Some observations are connected directly to the ”short-range” bubble, and both ”data” boxes are connected to the ”Applications” box.
Despite strong similarities between meteorological and AI/ML ”big data” regimes, and despite prior exposure to AI in the field, meteorologists were still confronted by fundamental differences in how AI/ML observations, data, and models scaled, which appeared both as frictions and as potential affordances of ”AI weather models.” We organize our findings around these three sites in the meteorological ”data pipeline:” observations, data, and models. Meteorological
data
is a broad category containing the ”inferred parameters” of satellite observation systems and other remote sensing tools, the ”reanalysis data” produced by assimilating observations via physics-based models, and the long-term climatology data produced by massive models
(Emanuel,
2020
)
.
Observations
are less ambiguous – they usually correspond to direct records of meteorological metrics like precipitation, temperature, and humidity, although they have been ”lent” to less direct measurements like satellite and radar methods. Even so, meteorologists typically regard observations as separate from models, with the models used to infer ”indirect” humidity from satellite data often marking them as ”not really observations;” this makes observations something a bit like AI/ML ”ground truth” because they have to be directly collected from physical things on the ground. Finally,
models
in the US meteorological context almost exclusively refer to General Circulation Models (GCMs), massive physics-based models of the global atmosphere that take million-dollar supercomputers to run. These are vaguely analogous to the ”foundation models” of AI/ML, large and expensive coagulations of compute and data that form a foundation for downstream research. The distinction between ”data” and ”observations” here is that models can output data, but cannot output ”real” or ”direct” observations. We split our findings across data/observations/models to reveal frictions of scale, fundamental gaps in what makes observations/data/models ”large scale” or ”global scale” or ”scalable.”
4.1.
Scaling Observations: Predictability in Air/Ground Observations
Figure 2.
The current section discusses
observations
(highlighted). The observations of the ”free atmosphere” are marked in orange.
Figure 2. Per Figure 1, with the ”Observations” box highlighted.
Figure 3.
The ”boundary layer,” with the ”free atmosphere” above it. The free atmosphere is the site of global climate modeling. From Earth Systems Research Laboratory, NOAA
Figure 3. An educational figure of the ”boundary layer,” the closest 5-10km of air to the surface. The space above it, the ”free atmosphere,” is the main site of atmospheric prediction.
Figure 4.
Some observations lie above this ”boundary layer;” others lie within it. From WMO, ”Observation components of the Global Observing System”
Figure 4. An educational figure of various types of meteorological observations. Some observations (satellite, aircraft, radiosonde) lie above the ”boundary layer,” while others (buoy, surface, weather ship) lie within it.
A basic axiom of meteorology is that of the ”boundary layer,” roughly the 5-7km of air closest to the surface. Above the boundary layer is the ”free atmosphere,” which forms the primary domain of global atmospheric models. Within the boundary layer, ”turbulence” dominates, making prediction necessarily smaller scale; as Stull notes, ”boundary layer meteorology and micrometeorology are virtually synonymous”
(Stull,
2012
)
. The meteorological ”global scale” and ”local scale” Tsing discusses in
Friction
is therefore spatially assigned to observations: surface observations are in a sense more ”local” than upper-air observations from balloons, airplanes, and satellites, as these upper-air observations are less determined by local conditions and so, to meteorologists, are more suitable for modeling general circulation.
This axiom of the ”boundary” layer creates a hierarchy of observation scale; while upper-air observations naturally connect to global ”general circulation models,” surface observations more naturally connect to local applications. This can be expressed through what P12, a machine learning meteorologist notes in terms of information: even with a massive number of ”very dense” surface observations, ”you’re not actually constraining the flow” [P12] of general circulation. A large number of surface observations are still
surface observations
; quantity alone cannot connect data points and make them readily applicable at a global scale.
As Figure 2 shows, observations enter the meteorological data pipeline at two main points: as material for the global-scale
reanalysis data
that drives GCMs, and as local ”finetuning” data for generating domain-specific or area-specific forecasts. While both surface and upper-air observations are used at both points, surface observations are generally associated with the fine-tuning ”local” step, while upper-air observations are associated with the large-scale and high-octane climate models. Location of observations, not just quantity, makes a model ”scale” across territory.
Accordingly, few private companies have the data necessary to create meaningfully different global meteorological models. While four ”observation” weather companies produce upper-air and global scale observations like radar observations (Climavision), balloon measurements (Windborne), satellite observations (Tomorrow.io), and radio occultations (Spire), most private weather companies work with local and/or domain-specific forms of data, limiting their access to ”global scale” weather models and data
except as end users or endpoint service providers
. Surface observations like ground stations, social media data, or boat sensors more easily interfaced with existing infrastructures of companies: the surface, after all, is where all the people are. But because surface observations do not provide much information about the ”global” atmosphere, the main way they could be leveraged was on a local or domain-specific scale, fine-tuning the outputs of the national or global climate models.
Ultimately, this meteorological regime of observation scale defines how observations can be moved and utilized epistemically and (infra)structurally. Epistemically, the ”boundary layer” divides surface from and upper-air observations in terms of
what can be predicted
in a way that sheer data quantity cannot really breach; even ten thousand surface observations
are still surface observations
, unsuitable for the same type of global work as balloon, airplane, or satellite observations. This distinction also operates on the level of infrastructure and
data pipelines
– upper-air observations maintain closer connections to GCMs, while surface observations can be more effectively leveraged at the ”last mile” (the ”finetuning” step). And this distinction also maps onto the public/private division of labor in the US ”weather enterprise:” precisely because general circulation modeling is nearly exclusively done by the national weather agencies, private attempts to achieve ”global scale” face challenges in data, compute, and expertise [P4].
The problem of local ground measurements can be bypassed by the few large observation companies which maintain global upper-air observation networks, but this reveals another major roadblock to ”global scale” – precisely because meteorological models have improved over a slow ”quiet revolution” of incremental data/model improvements
(Bauer
et al.
,
2015
)
, even significant global datasets can struggle to meaningfully improve global climate models which are themselves a product of hundreds of different institutional and private actors sharing data. Several interviewees [P4,P9,P10] noted initial attempts by these companies to create proprietary global climate models based on their own global data; however, these models faced extreme difficulty significantly improving on (or even matching) the massive government models, which often had access to their data as well as observation data from a host of other companies and state actors. Over the 2010s, the decreasing cost of compute power led all four of the major observation companies to create their own proprietary general circulation models – but these models were overwhelmingly
not operational
, serving as advertising or proof-of-concept work while the companies themselves used US or European state models as necessary [P10].
As such, private weather companies faced two major problems at achieving ”global scale:” private observations were largely ”local scale” surface observations, and even for the major companies with ”global scale” and widely-distributed observations, weather models already ingested so much diverse data that private models struggled to significantly improve predictions in the general case. Proprietary observations could still be profitable – as private-sector meteorologists P4 and P9 noted, it was very feasible to achieve better performance on local scales with good observations. But profitable ”global scale” improvements remained out of reach of even the largest weather companies, leaving regional observation companies to sell locally, while for most ”global scale” observation companies ”NOAA is our big customer” [P10]. And because NOAA has historically operated under a ”single payer model” [P4], data was often sold under a free-redistribution model which made it impossible to profit from data more than once. While effective at creating precision-nested global datasets, this made platform-style rent-seeking from data use and reuse more or less impossible.
Against this backdrop, AI/ML methods appeared with a potent
promise
, a ”regime of scale” more similar to the scaling-logics which dominate tech startup culture, what we call the entrepreneurial regime of scale. First, AI/ML stood to exploit more varied forms of data for ”global scale” models [P12]: ground observation data, but also social media data and the wide range of platform data available to client companies. This is not just a question of improved prediction / accuracy; it is a question of
who gets to scale
, or
who gets to claim profitable data-driven advantage
. As mentioned previously, private companies were far more likely to have access to surface and other varied observations because their clients were rarely weather companies themselves – they were interested in weather as a relevant factor in construction, or financial modeling, or water resource management. Platform observations are also often far more ”free” than upper-air observations: as noted by Zhang et. al, AI/ML methods became viable due to the Internet and the proliferation of platform data
(Zhang
et al.
,
2024
)
. This data is more ”free” precisely because of its embeddedness in ”everyday life,” allowing it to draw from the work of users
without their consent
.
”Global scale” meteorological observations, and even traditional ground observations, lack this sort of ”free generation:” they cannot appropriate the work of users, and instead, according to P1, ”you have to say, hey, can I put a 60 foot concrete pole in your front yard?” [P1] Upper-air observations are too far from people to appropriate ”free” work; even ground observations have relied on complex negotiations with whoever owns the land. In this context, flexible and platform-like observations appear easy to obtain and therefore inherently valuable. As P12 noted, this stood to change
how observations appear with respect to data/models
– ”in traditional modeling, we treat the observation system as static,” but incorporating ground and platform data could create more mobile and flexible observation infrastructures which form ”a really direct pathway between the observation system that we deploy in the real world and the forecast that comes out of it.” These dreams of being able to flexibly represent ground reality and of tighter and closed user-observation-forecast loops are classically associated with the data infrastructures of tech platforms: here they appear as a tentative promise of AI/ML methods in meteorology.
Simultaneously, AI/ML methods appeared as a potent
technology of promise
, a way to make marginal accuracy improvements into heralds of fundamental change. While meteorological models improve with better observations, this is understood as a ”quiet revolution” in meteorology
(Bauer
et al.
,
2015
)
, a slow accumulation which makes explosive change difficult to claim. But AI/ML models seem to
scale differently with data
: they express ”emergent abilities” which ”cannot be predicted by simply extrapolating the performance improvements on smaller-scale models”
(Wei
et al.
,
2022
)
, and this ”emergence” is closely coupled with the explosive growth of their host tech companies. Rather than an incremental ”quiet revolution,” AI/ML models are able to claim loud and significant improvements off of incremental data/model scaling, a promise largely unavailable to meteorology. This incommensurable, inscrutable behavior at scale was referenced by the interviewees as an ”AI magic” [P6] that allowed sheer observation quantity to appear as a sign of imminent, explosive change. Observations could become almost agnostically useful and highly fungible, and so ”there are some private companies now that are kind of picking up on that and saying, well, I have all the satellite data, so now I have the currency of machine learning” [P4]. This attempt to inject raw observations with explosive power was not new: as several interviewees noted [P1,P9], various private companies had used different technologies (satellites, special sensors, special observation types) to claim explosive improvement from novel datasets for around three decades, ever since the partial liberalization of US meteorology in the 1990s. But the AI/ML regime of scale served as both a model and a potentially new way to make use of observations in the fungible and explosive ways observed in tech startups. Additionally, AI/ML methods appeared
externally
as an almost contagious driver of data sale and resale. P6, who worked in a data aggregation company, noted an uptick in ”more AI, machine learning kind of people” as customers; most private meteorologists noted similar external interest. Ultimately, observations would be ”the currency of machine learning,” exploited by observation companies themselves or prospected by transcendent tech startups.
Across these examples, AI/ML methods appear to meteorology as the promise of a partially alien regime of scale. AI/ML methods promised to use
ground and social data
, to allow for highly flexible data accumulation that does not require physical infrastructure, and to make massive observation networks and data arbitrage hold
promise
in the explosive ways that data does for tech companies. Rather than just an epistemological friction, we see here that AI/ML represents
infrastructural
and
institutional
realignments based on the frictions between meteorological and AI/ML regimes of scale. There is no inherent reason that AI/ML methods would make incremental data improvements exciting, or make private weather models more economically viable, or make ”ground observations” or social media data more predictive. These affordances are based on
how AI is used
as much as
what the method itself is
– in this case, AI/ML promises a partial realignment towards the flexible data accumulation and data-driven-advertising pipelines of tech startups, even as meteorology has long succeeded through a state regime of scale.
4.2.
Scaling Data: Satellite Data and Reanalysis Data
Figure 5.
The current section discusses
reanalysis and remote sensing data
Figure 5. Per Figure 1, with the first ”Data” box highlighted.
Both AI/ML and physics-based meteorology place emphasis on ”big data:” modern AI/ML methods originated from a massive trove of internet and platform data
(Zhang
et al.
,
2024
)
, while meteorology was institutionally established from massive remote sensing networks established over the 1960s, and the field has reckoned with increasing quantities of remote sensing and model data in the past two decades
(Emanuel,
2020
)
. In each case, data bleeds into and is simultaneously separated from ”observations” / ”ground truth” via various metrics (inter-rater reliability, predictability). Data in meteorology is often the product of models or other ordered techniques: satellite and other ”indirect” observations are made data by coordinating them with physics-based methods, filtering techniques, and ground observations, while in ML making data ”ML ready” often involves ”introducing some structure” and making the data less ”raw”
(Thakkar
et al.
,
2022
)
. Additionally, because data can be both the input to and the output of a model (unlike ”observations”), it can ambiguously represent very different things – reanalysis data, ”provisional” global-scale predictions, and more localized predictions – as part of long and winding data pipelines.
As such, data forms the core of both AI/ML and meteorological regimes of scale, serving as a sort of infrastructural glue that lies between local/regional/global observation networks and charismatic ”foundation models.” This section shows how data becomes ”big” through two different compromises in meteorology’s state regime of scale: via physics-based ”gridding” with reanalysis data, and through downsampling and ground coordination with satellite data. In each case, the global scale of this data represents a useful but somewhat unsettling separation from realness, either through the involvement of statistical/physical methods (reanalysis) or through a separation from ”real” weather parameters (satellites). Weather data is siloed because of ”balkanization” [P9] or interdisciplinary divides [P5] or the lack of incremental profitability discussed in the prior section [P8]. It is often also
too big
, discarded along the data pipeline (by institutions, meteorologists, users) precisely because of its size [P1]. Precisely because meteorology is ”domain specific,” meteorologists develop ways to prospect and reclaim weather data across disciplinary and institutional lines: ”weather,” just like ”AI,” seems to appear as a kind of common term for diverse data to organize institutions, disciplines, and organizations around.
In this context, AI/ML methods have promised a reorientation of what data is useful and what data compromises can be made in search of scale. Both AI/ML and physics-based weather models predict using ”reanalysis data,” weather observations which are uniformly embedded into a longitude/latitude grid (”gridded”) and extended through physical laws. Current efforts in AI/ML weather modeling are increasingly focused on bypassing ”reanalysis data” (most notably the ERA-5 dataset) and going ”directly to observations,” paradoxically by leaning more heavily
on a different form of meteorological data
– remote sensing data, specifically the massive data of satellites. While it may initially appear obvious why these initial AI/ML efforts have focused on one ”big data” (satellite data) while discarding the other (reanalysis data), this choice reveals that AI/ML regimes have specific tolerances for
what error is acceptable as a price of scaling up.
The following section explores how exactly the 50-year-old meteorological panacea of satellites, the ”all-seeing orbital cameras”
(Ramage,
1971
)
, have been linked to modern AI/ML methods: this is less of a question of
potential predictability
and more of the ”natural” gridding of satellite data, the way that satellite data’s already-global nature bypasses the spatial negotiations prominent in traditional meteorology.
4.2.1.
ERA-5 and ”Reanalysis Data”
But recently, in the past three years or so, AI has definitely blown up. And now people are like, okay, I have all this data. Machine learning needs data. So the more proprietary data I have now, I actually have proprietary machine learning. Because right now all these other models, GraphCast, Pangu-weather, most of them, if not all of them, are training on ERA-5.
Same damn data set.
[P4]
As discussed in section 2.2 and mentioned by P4, the current ”AI weather models” are all trained on ERA-5, a reanalysis dataset built by ”assimilating” diverse observations into a spatial and temporal grid through the use of physical laws. Data assimilation is a ”mathematical soup” [P2] that combines statistical denoising, filtering, and ”fitting” observations to physical laws; it requires skills that many public/private institutions may not have access to [P4], and has historically limited the construction of effective ”foundational” global models to the state meteorological agencies. The reliance of AI weather models on reanalysis data was a constant point of contention for interviewees and was generally brought up quickly when we began discussing the new AI models. Because physical assumptions are directly used to form reanalysis data, training an AI/ML model on this data would be ”a model training a model;” essentially, an AI/ML data pipeline could not really stand
outside
meteorology because it relied on all the expertise that went into data assimilation – ”if you’re going to do AI on the model, it’s going to tell you the equations that run the model” [P9]. Beyond this, the fact that virtually everyone doing AI/ML ”starts with ERA-5” [P10] was itself a point of contention. ERA-5 is only one of many reanalysis datasets: it might not be the most ”appropriate” dataset for a given task. Contemporary meteorological work often compares results between two or more reanalysis datasets, and so the current position of AI weather modeling, with ERA-5 almost treated like ground truth, seemed odd to many interviewees.
4.2.2.
Satellite and other remote sensing data
…when you talk observational data, I think of *in situ* data, like surface observations, but it’s way bigger than that, right? And satellite data is is huge. Unfortunately, satellite data is also huge. [P1]
As such, the current push of AI/ML meteorology at the time of my interviews was to ”go up the food chain” [P12] and directly assimilate ”raw observations” via AI/ML methods, bypassing reanalysis data entirely. This is often known as ”end-to-end” AI/ML weather prediction, because bypassing reanalysis data would make the entire ”data pipeline” AI/ML-driven; weather prediction would finally be fully detached from the application of physical laws. As we argued in the Background (2.3), the ”bitter lesson” of AI/ML has been that it is necessary to deprioritize ”human knowledge of the domain”
(Sutton,
2019
)
in favor of more effectively leveraging computation and data. As such, the ”end-to-end” production of weather forecasts, unbound from physical laws, is an active, positive good under the AI/ML regime of scale, and pursuing this kind of direct prediction has been a major focus of AI/ML weather efforts.
To accomplish this goal of prediction from ”raw observations,” academic work like Allen et. al
(Allen
et al.
,
2025
)
has made extensive use of satellite data/observations, which are already ”global” in a way which bypasses conventional reanalysis practices. Paradoxically, though, satellite data are the least ”raw” of the observations available to meteorologists. Unlike ”direct” observations of parameters like temperature, precipitation, and humidity, satellite data only weakly measure actual atmospheric state: ”they’re literally an average of a bunch of layers of the atmosphere” [P8]. As such, satellite data has to be
made meaningful
via ground data [P3] and ”statistical and physical retrieval methods” [P8], giving it a much more shaky claim to the ”ground truth” of balloon, buoy, and ground observations. All this meant that satellite observations were ”basically models” [P4], not exactly ”observations” at all.
The question then is how AI/ML ”end-to-end” efforts have been linked with remote sensing and specifically satellite data. One clear answer comes in the different ways that AI/ML and meteorological regimes understand ”ground truth.” As we described above, the distinction between ”observations” and ”data” in meteorology is often expressed in terms of how close data is to representing parameters like temperature and humidity. Satellite data, even data like ”radiances” which represent real things in the world (emitted light/heat), are less close to ”ground truth” by virtue of not being a ”meteorological” physical property like temperature or humidity. This appears to be much less of a barrier for AI/ML models, given the field’s almost exuberant tendency to correlate very different types of data with one another.
Another answer comes in the classic futuristic position of satellites in meteorology. Satellites have a nearly sixty-year history in meteorology as a technology of intense (if unfulfilled) promise very similar to the modern promises of AI/ML. As early as 1971, C.S. Ramage noted that ”conceivably, the novel distance and area-integrating powers of satellites will eventually enable us to overcome the bugbear of unrepresentative and inaccurate point observations”
(Ramage,
1971
)
; by 1991, historians like Courain were already investigating ”a perception that remote sensing has not lived up to its expectations in improving weather forecasting”
(Courain,
1991
)
. Today, satellites continue to function in meteorology as a kind of arrested future of utter ”distance and area-integrating” power, massive corporate-state hybrid investments that aim to make the state scale of meteorological observations much less relevant. In this context, it is hardly surprising that novel AI/ML methods would attach themselves to existing and powerful technofutures in meteorology, ones already represented by defense contractors like Tomorrow.io who had the capital necessary to fund large satellite projects and now have the capital to fund large AI/ML GPU infrastructures.
4.3.
Scaling Models: Ensembles and ”Physical Consistency”
Figure 6.
The current section discusses
models and model outputs.
Figure 6. Per Figure 1, with the ”Models” and second ”Data” boxes highlighted.
As discussed in the previous sections, AI/ML appears to operate under different regimes of scale at the level of observations (what ”large scale” observations mean, how observations connect to ”global scale” analysis) and at the level of data (what processing is ”acceptable” for scale). In this final section, we discuss how
models
scale – this is perhaps the most connected to current practice, because while AI/ML-ready observations and data are still highly provisional, self-contained AI/ML ”weather models” have existed for over three years at the time of writing. The initial wave of AI/ML weather models were trained on ERA-5 and developed by data science labs in Google
(Lam
et al.
,
2023
)
, Huawei Cloud
(Bi
et al.
,
2023
)
, and Nvidia
(Pathak
et al.
,
2022
)
; current development is split between these prior actors and a host of meteorological agencies, with maybe the most sustained state effort being the ECMWF’s AIFS
(Lang
et al.
,
2024
)
initiative. As these models are put in the place of more ”traditional” physics-based meteorological models, they are
assumed to scale like those models do
, and could be put through predictability (and therefore generalizability) tests designed for physics-based models. For many meteorologists, this revealed intense differences in how AI and physics-based weather models generalize and operate at ”scale.”
The following section discusses frictions in the ways that AI/ML and physics-based meteorological models achieve and translate ”scale.” First, we discuss
speed and resolution
, which we understand as ”AI/ML scale” without ”meteorological scale.” Increased data and compute use are traditionally understood as a marker of ”scale” in AI/ML models; but these traits did not really translate to either ”scale” or even ”accuracy” in the meteorological regime. Simultaneously, methods which aim to establish meteorological models’ temporal scale (how far in advance they could effectively predict) often failed to function on AI/ML models, whose predictive power deteriorated in unusual ways, and which could not make the physically-embedded ”strategic decisions” to represent or not represent different oscillations that made meteorological models scale. Anna Tsing argues that climate models are ”charismatic and pedagogical, incorporat[ing] strategy through the forms of global Nature they delineate”
(Tsing,
2011
)
, scaling not through sheer mass of
compute power
but through the ability to make weather/climate claims over (inter)national territory. In our interviews, this geopolitically-embedded ”state” pedagogy contrasted messily with the compute/data-quantity rooted ”scale” of AI/ML models. AI/ML weather models’ fast speed did not make them ”scale” under the rhetorical paradigm of meteorology; it made them efficient.
4.3.1.
Speed and Resolution: AI/ML Scale without Meteorological Scale
What became pretty clear was that, okay, we can approximate the accuracy of the numerical models for 10s of 1000s of times less cost, and that’s going to create business opportunity that people don’t yet really understand, because that kind of pattern has happened several times with different technologies in the past. [P6]
The most immediate affordance of AI/ML models was their ability to run exceptionally quickly, and/or at much higher spatial resolution, in comparison to the contemporary NWP models. All three of the initial AI/ML forecasting papers highlighted this speed and/or resolution: Google’s Graphcast ”predicts hundreds of weather variables, over 10 days at 0.25° resolution globally, in under one minute”
(Lam
et al.
,
2023
)
, Huawei Cloud’s PanguWeather was ”more than 10,000-times faster than the operational IFS [physics models]”
(Bi
et al.
,
2023
)
, and Nvidia’s FourCastNet was ”orders of magnitude faster than IFS”
(Pathak
et al.
,
2022
)
. These resolution/speed improvements are a marker of scale under the AI/ML paradigm, where the largeness of model ”scale” is often measured in terms of dataset size or (more frequently) model parameters (for example, see
(Wei
et al.
,
2022
)
). Indeed, the GraphCast paper primarily discusses scale in terms of the ability for accuracy to increase with ”greater compute resources and higher resolution data.”
Across A1’s interviews, however, we tended not to see any particular association between this resolution/speed and meteorological ”scale.” Models could be used for new problems [P11] or run on demand for domain-specific and/or location-specific applications [P12]; they were cheap enough to provide ”continuous forecasts” instead of the twice- or four-times-daily forecasts physics-based models were capable of [P1]. They could also be used to run massive ten-thousand-member ensembles [P10] which could be used to create massive output data. But none of this seemed to link explicitly to meteorological scale: they were questions of efficiency, resolution, and forecasting density which seemed independent of how models connected to particular spatial (”global-scale,” ”meso-scale,” ”synoptic-scale”) or temporal (”daily, weekly, seasonal”) scales used in meteorology.
Moreover, efforts to translate this efficiency into accuracy (of models or data) tend to run into issues. This can most clearly be seen with the 10,000 member ensembles enabled by these novel AI/ML methods. Ensembles have a long history in meteorological research; because GCMs’ simulations of the atmosphere are partially but not fully constrained by the laws of physics, perturbing the initial conditions of GCMs allows for the creation of distributions of physically consistent atmospheric states. Without that physical consistency, the probabilistic meaning of an ensemble is uncertain [P4] – ”you don’t want just like white noise in the like the posterior forecast distribution, like you want some coherence, you want some skill, right?” [P12]. Ultimately, these models were able to be more ”accurate” in some sense and ”faster” in some sense without this inherently cascading into ”scale” or even ”performance:” they might lead to improved resolution over some scale (spatial or temporal), but they would not immediately lead to a different scale of the model itself, in stark contrast to AI/ML methods which closely entangle speed, size, and scale.
4.3.2.
Interdisciplinary Use
Simultaneously, downstream efforts to use AI/ML models have revealed how physical consistency has served as a critical tool for interdisciplinary work. As discussed in our literature review, many environmental and earth science collaborations have been organized under ”whole ocean” logics like in
(Baker
et al.
,
2005
)
. In this sense, rather than being ”domain specific,” adherence to physical laws serves as a basis for interdisciplinary collaboration, a tool for
bridging
domains. P4 and P6 noted that efforts to operationally use AI/ML models had been stymied by odd traits of these models in spite of their surface similarities to physics-based models; the model outputs could initially look similar, and they could effectively perform similarly under common metrics like RMSE, but because forecasters’ regimes of trust were built on physical consistency, benchmarks alone were often unconvincing when ”you could have unphysical scenarios where it’s 80 degrees and two feet of snow. Obviously the models aren’t that stupid, but there’s no way to physically restrict that, right?” [P4]. Similarly, P6 described an AI forecasting workshop attended by operational forecasters and a GraphCast researcher (from Google Deepmind); operational forecasters variously said, ”I can’t use this. There’s no physical consistency.” The AI/ML researcher replied, ”You tell me the metrics you’re interested in, and I’ll optimize for those metrics.” This is hardly unique to meteorology: AI/ML research has a healthy distrust of benchmarks in its own right
(Cooper
et al.
,
2023
; Henderson
et al.
,
2019
; Liao
et al.
,
2022
)
. But established AI/ML methods (formal and informal) map poorly onto this regime of interdisciplinary trust – if interdisciplinary models rely on a physical consistency that AI/ML models cannot provide, ”do we make all of those models AI too?!” [P6]. This almost ”contagious” nature of AI/ML models helps explain why the initial AI/ML weather models had integrated most readily into tech platforms (Google Search, Microsoft Aurora) and into financial speculation models (which circa 2017 had been largely absorbed into AI/ML via ”big techification”
(Hansen and Thylstrup,
2023
)
).
Attempts to discipline meteorologists with negotiations built around AI/ML benchmarks run into another key obstacle: while both AI/ML and meteorological regimes of scale engage with statistics, modern physics-based meteorology distinguished itself explicitly by avoiding the excess use statistics; instead scaling via global ”physical information” and ”physical laws.” Current ”physics-based” meteorological models contain a large number of dense statistical components: ”boundary layer” interactions, the physical ”parameterization” of clouds and condensation (among other things), and data assimilation are all conducted via statistical methods without strong physical justifications. As such, meteorologists working between AI and meteorology have learned to negotiate and limit these ”black-box” methods
in meteorological data-scientific terms
. For example, P8 argued that AI/ML methods imposed ”intrinsic biases” on prediction, accumulating error in highly aphysical ways that revealed their ’nature’ as AI/ML models despite superficial similarities with physical models. P4 went further, arguing that prioritizing root-mean-squared error (RMSE) in training acted like a built-in ”fine-tuning” step that
limited model generalizability
. This statement is almost incoherent in the AI/ML regime of scale, but it is highly coherent in the meteorological regime of scale, where adherence to physics over raw statistical error functions as a disciplined way to make a model scale. Under the meteorological regime of scale, AI/ML models in their current form were rhetorically stunted and unable to make use of meteorological models’ ”rhetorical strategies,” in Tsing’s terms
(Tsing,
2011
)
, which could make weather/climate models function at scale. This limited their operational use to tech-platform weather apps like Microsoft Aurora and Google Search, infrastructures already dominated by AI/ML regimes of making models scale.
5.
Discussion
5.1.
Regimes of Scale: AI/ML in Friction with Rival Big Datas
Prior studies of HCI have mapped data-scientific work across many application domains, advocated for integrating domain knowledge into data science, and studied data-scientific tools as basic infrastructures to be used by domain scientists. Across these works, AI/ML and data-scientific tools occupy a kind of empty, domain-agnostic state to be ”filled” with the target domain(s) through ”real world” data, the identification of specific problems, and domain specific ”data structures”
(Zhang
et al.
,
2022
)
. Domains are essentially the local to data science / AI/ML’s global, which is why the representation of ”domain knowledge” can be understood as an effective method to improve ”actionability”
(Jung
et al.
,
2024
)
or get ”timely feedback on deployments”
(Sambasivan and Veeraraghavan,
2022
)
. Our intervention into this literature on domains in HCI is an adaptation of Tsing’s local-global theory of ”friction”
(Tsing,
2011
)
. Tsing traces international environmentalism by rejecting contrasts between local conditions and ”global spatial compression” in favor of examining ”the links between heterogeneous projects of space and scale making”
(Tsing,
2011
)
; in essence, the question is not globalism but ”multiple, divergent globalisms”
(Tsing,
2011
)
which run messily against each other.
Following Tsing, then, there is not one way to make ”scale” or one way to organize ”big data:” massive data processed at global scale has been achieved in various forms since the invention of networked computing, and so different projects of scale-making, operating along different logics, keep running into each other. We use ”regime of scale” to describe the ways that meteorological (1970s-) and AI/ML (2010s-) data systems have organized, expanded, and achieved ”scale,” and our Findings uses the traditional stages of the meteorological data pipeline (observations, data, models) to show how the technoscientific objects of meteorology scale in fundamentally different ways than those assumed by modern AI/ML methods.
Because modern AI/ML has a particular regime of scale, the study and manipulation of large datasets cannot be reduced to AI/ML or even data science. HCI scholars Lakier et. al note that the marine scientists they studied did data-scientific work without considering themselves ”data scientists”
(Lakier
et al.
,
2025
)
. As they argue, the interviewees generally ”saw data science as having a different scope (e.g., machine learning-focused), or as more about problem solving for the sake of problem solving, rather than for science.” Similarly, Hansen and Thylstrup note a progressive displacement of the ”quant” (a sort of finance data scientist) by firms increasingly ”embracing the tech firm identity” and rejecting even the value of data-scientific intuition formed around financial modeling
(Hansen and Thylstrup,
2023
)
. In each case, heterogeneous projects of scale-making come into contact with one another in ways which make ”data science” far more particular than just the use of large datasets: instead, it is associated with infrastructural practices and even ways of doing business closely tied to tech companies. Regimes of scale can effectively track the infrastructural, institutional, and cultural meanings that ”data science” and ”AI/ML” holds beyond sheer association with massive datasets.
As our Findings show, AI/ML methods in meteorology are linked to fast, efficient models, to an enhanced use of ground and social data, and to a generic ”observations are king” logic. Strikingly, they are also often associated with a democratization of meteorology
2
2
2
See https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/aardvark-weather-how-ai-democratizing-forecasting-all-anablock-r7wue/
, a way to do weather prediction without relying on the million-dollar supercomputers of the major meteorological agencies; instead, AI/ML weather models are often open-sourced and can be run on a laptop or (for the larger models) on relatively small GPU HPC resources. None of these qualities are inherent to AI/ML methods in some abstract/theoretical sense; they appear through the friction between modern AI/ML and the established meteorological regime of scale. Rather than being viewed in isolation as a kind of global flattening agent, AI/ML initiatives must be understood against and in contrast with existing data practices and existing ways of making scale. This is particularly pressing given that the past year has seen massive capital investment aiming to expand AI/ML technologies out of tech corporate realms and to virtually all elements of public life. Hansen and Thylstrup have already shown the progressive ”big techification” of finance
(Hansen and Thylstrup,
2023
)
, but finance is almost comically unreal; with meteorology ”you have to own the land” [P1], and most other scientific fields are no less painfully physical. Studies of current frontiers of AI/ML use (healthcare and health data!) must pair situated analysis with an effective analysis of frictions of scale, most critically
with prior layers of big data initiatives
. Despite the frontier pretensions of AI/ML (or the promise that it would expand into ”new” domains), there is no real virgin soil when it comes to big datafication; there has almost always been some other massive data regime which scaled along very different lines. Those tensions form a large part of AI/ML negotiations as the technology steps further outside its cradle in big techspace.
5.2.
Social Infrastructures of Scale: What Makes ”Good Data?”
Just as they organize data pipelines, regimes of scale contain scripts for
negotiating
”what makes good data” between researchers, users, and data subjects. As discussed in section 4.3.2, several interviewees described instances of partial incommensurability between AI/ML and meteorological standards of good data/models: most notably, P6 described an AI forecasting workshop attended by operational forecasters and a GraphCast researcher where the AI/ML researcher responded to requests for physical consistency by saying, ”Look. I’m not a meteorologist, I’m a data scientist. You tell me the metrics you’re interested in, and I’ll optimize for those metrics.” This would be a very reasonable answer to give to another AI/ML researcher: benchmarks serve as the grounds for model generalizability in AI/ML research, Benchmark primacy is not gospel in AI/ML, and plenty of research inside AI/ML has called benchmarks into question
(Cooper
et al.
,
2023
; Henderson
et al.
,
2019
; Liao
et al.
,
2022
)
, but they maintain a kind of hegemony in AI/ML research space, setting ”the terms of debate.” Benchmarks may be flawed; the solution is more or better benchmarks,
so give me a metric
. But physics-based meteorology has its own data-scientific model rhetorics: model ”skill,” for one, and ”physical consistency,” which appears domain-specific but serves a highly interdisciplinary role, connecting physics-based models to other fields (water resource management, actuarial science) which depend on the physical consistency of meteorology itself. This moment of friction between operational forecasters and AI/ML researchers is similar in some ways to the ”bias to repair” practices described by HCI scholars Lin and Jackson
(Lin and Jackson,
2023
)
, by which error (and its repair) can serve as sites of collaboration and can restructure hierarchies of expertise between remote sensing scientists and AI practitioners. Throughout our Findings, and particularly in section 4.3.2, the story seems to be one of
incommensurability
: the hierarchies of expertise between meteorological researchers and operational forecasters have spawned scripts of ”good data” that are largely bypassed by AI/ML researchers (who learned ”good data” with their own data subjects), and so in this context, the ability to work through or even express error is impaired.
Several interviewees described points where AI/ML weather models would output results like ”negative humidity” or ”strange wave patterns,” errors with no clear means of repair; instead, the errors served as unsightly signs of the differences between the two fields. In their study of trust in corporate data science, HCI scholars Passi and Jackson note how explainability was prioritized as central for creating a good model by corporate users, but not by AI/ML researchers: ”Data scientists describe the lack these explanations not as an impediment but as a
trade-off
between in-depth understanding and predictive power”
(Passi and Jackson,
2018
)
. The errors of the AI/ML models are hence differently interpreted across professional communities, and (as seen in 4.3.2) what is ”error” to meteorologists might be viewed as a necessary component of scale to AI/ML researchers.
As discussed in section 4.3.2, the oft-cited domain agnostic AI/ML ways of scaling were described by several interviewees [P4,P8,P12] as stunted in
data-scientific
terms, not just meteorological ones. P12 notes that one major difference between meteorology and domains like NLP is that ”we have this strong physical structure, physical information, to the problem that we have.” Meteorology established itself as a ”physics-based” science in the 1950s and 60s in explicit contrast to existing statistical and time-series methods of weather/climate prediction
(Lorenz,
1963
)
, making then ”audacious” claims
(Bauer
et al.
,
2015
)
that a ”dynamical core” of physical equations could extend model prediction across a global scale. This means that AI/ML methods, which depend heavily on ”black-boxed” statistical methods, have had to reckon with the secondary position pure statistics has had in meteorological history. In contrast to popular depictions of AI/ML as domain transcendent, AI/ML methods in meteorology often appeared to interviewees as less ”agnostic” and more situated: the methods used particular kinds of data, imposed ”intrinsic biases” on forecasting [P8], and ”fine-tuned” models out of being truly general [P4]. The ”domain” framework, which contrasts ”real world” domains with ”pure” data science, cannot effectively track these frictions; ”pure” data science was the
base
from which meteorology grew as a science.
The framework of ”regimes of scale” allows us to understand how these tensions impact every stage of the data pipeline. AI/ML is not even really a ”bigger” data regime than meteorology, not in terms of sheer data quantity; as P12 notes, ”there’s significantly more Earth observation data than there is text data on the internet.” What AI/ML does represent to the meteorological data pipeline is an extraordinarily successful way of observing, joining, and using data, one solidly tied to platform/internet circuits and tech companies’ observation and control of data flows between individual human users.
In other words, AI/ML holds promise for meteorology precisely because of the way that it is tied to tech companies
: the methods are associated with more flexible / virtual data pipelines, personalized forecasts, and passive and ”human-centered” data collection, all major points of innovation in the rise of entrepreneurial scale. Rather than (just) empty and ”domain agnostic” methods used at will by downstream actors, AI/ML methods increasingly also represent an institutional and infrastructural realignment with a more entrepreneurial regime of scale, and this seems to be a crucial component of how the methods are taken to practice.
6.
Conclusion
Through interviews with 12 forecasters/meteorologists from a variety of public and private institutions, this paper examines how two different regimes of scale – the meteorological ”state scale” and the AI/ML ”entrepreneurial scale” – produce frictions across weather data pipelines. Ultimately, we argue that despite the oft-cited ”domain agnostic” nature of AI/ML methods, they are effectively defined in terms of their own respective data infrastructures and ”regime of scale,” and so in practice are closely tied to specific sorts of applications: advertising, finance, platform administration, and other forms of high-capitalist speculation. This has made them very useful for tech companies, who aim to effectively corral and farm data from users in closed platform worlds. Domain agnosticism, as we show, does not make AI/ML methods effortless to adapt into meteorology and often actively inhibits integration into the ”domain sciences,” given the highly interdisciplinary role of terms like ”physical consistency” and ”precipitation” in meteorology. Put differently, AI/ML holds strong promise of being integrated into meteorology, but it continues to experience strong frictions not because meteorology is too domain-specific, but because AI/ML has its own particular regime of scale.
References
A. Allen, S. Markou, W. Tebbutt, J. Requeima, W. P. Bruinsma, T. R. Andersson, M. Herzog, N. D. Lane, M. Chantry, J. S. Hosking, and R. E. Turner (2025)
End-to-end data-driven weather prediction
.
Nature
641
(
8065
),
pp. 1172–1179
.
External Links:
ISSN 1476-4687
,
Document
Cited by:
§4.2.2
.
A. Alvarado Garcia, H. Candello, K. Badillo-Urquiola, and M. Wong-Villacres (2025)
Emerging Data Practices: Data Work in the Era of Large Language Models
.
In
Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
,
CHI ’25
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 1–21
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 9798400713941
Cited by:
§2.1
.
S. Avle, C. Lin, J. Hardy, and S. Lindtner (2020)
Scaling Techno-Optimistic Visions
.
Engaging Science, Technology, and Society
6
,
pp. 237–254
.
External Links:
ISSN 2413-8053
,
Document
Cited by:
footnote 1
.
K.S. Baker, S.J. Jackson, and J.R. Wanetick (2005)
Strategies Supporting Heterogeneous Data and Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Towards an Ocean Informatics Environment
.
In
Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
,
pp. 219b–219b
.
External Links:
ISSN 1530-1605
,
Document
Cited by:
§2.1
,
§4.3.2
.
P. Bauer, A. Thorpe, and G. Brunet (2015)
The quiet revolution of numerical weather prediction
.
Nature
525
(
7567
),
pp. 47–55
.
External Links:
ISSN 1476-4687
,
Document
Cited by:
§4.1
,
§4.1
,
§5.2
.
A. Bhattacharya, S. Stumpf, R. De Croon, and K. Verbert (2025)
Explanatory Debiasing: Involving Domain Experts in the Data Generation Process to Mitigate Representation Bias in AI Systems
.
In
Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
,
CHI ’25
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 1–20
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 9798400713941
Cited by:
§2.1
.
K. Bi, L. Xie, H. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Gu, and Q. Tian (2023)
Accurate medium-range global weather forecasting with 3D neural networks
.
Nature
619
(
7970
),
pp. 533–538
.
External Links:
ISSN 1476-4687
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§2.4
,
§4.3.1
,
§4.3
.
S. Bubeck, V. Chandrasekaran, R. Eldan, J. Gehrke, E. Horvitz, E. Kamar, P. Lee, Y. T. Lee, Y. Li, S. Lundberg, H. Nori, H. Palangi, M. T. Ribeiro, and Y. Zhang (2023)
Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early experiments with GPT-4
.
arXiv
.
External Links:
2303.12712
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Burton and S. J. Jackson (2012)
Constancy and Change in Scientific Collaboration: Coherence and Integrity in Long-Term Ecological Data Production
.
In
Proceedings of the 2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
,
HICSS ’12
,
USA
,
pp. 353–362
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 978-0-7695-4525-7
Cited by:
§2.1
.
M. S. Calota, W. W. Nieuwenhuys, J. Y. Huang, L. Chen, and M. Funk (2025)
Sensemaking Through Making: Developing Clinical Domain Knowledge by Crafting Synthetic Datasets and Prototyping System Architectures
.
In
Companion Publication of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference
,
pp. 549–553
.
External Links:
ISBN 9798400714863
Cited by:
§2.1
.
A. F. Cooper, K. Lee, M. Z. Choksi, S. Barocas, C. De Sa, J. Grimmelmann, J. Kleinberg, S. Sen, and B. Zhang (2023)
Is My Prediction Arbitrary? The Confounding Effects of Variance in Fair Classification Benchmarks
.
arXiv
.
External Links:
2301.11562
,
Document
Cited by:
§4.3.2
,
§5.2
.
M. E. Courain (1991)
Technology Reconciliation in the Remote Sensing ERA of United States Civilian Weather Forecasting: 1957 -1987.
.
Ph.D. Thesis
.
Cited by:
§4.2.2
.
A. D. Dalmedico (2001)
History and Epistemology of Models: Meteorology (1946—1963) as a Case Study
.
Archive for History of Exact Sciences
55
(
5
),
pp. 395–422
.
External Links:
41134119
,
ISSN 0003-9519
Cited by:
§2.2
.
Y. B. Dibike and P. Coulibaly (2006)
Temporal neural networks for downscaling climate variability and extremes
.
Neural Networks
19
(
2
),
pp. 135–144
.
External Links:
ISSN 0893-6080
,
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
P. N. N. Edwards (2013)
A Vast Machine: Computer Models, Climate Data, and the Politics of Global Warming
.
Illustrated edition edition
,
The MIT Press
,
Cambridge, Massachusetts London, England
.
External Links:
ISBN 978-0-262-51863-5
Cited by:
§1
,
§2.2
.
P. Edwards (2006)
Meteorology as Infrastructural Globalism
.
Osiris
.
External Links:
ISSN 0369-7827
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
,
§2.2
,
§2.2
.
J. B. Elsner and A. A. Tsonis (1992)
Nonlinear Prediction, Chaos, and Noise
.
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society
73
(
1
),
pp. 49–60
.
External Links:
ISSN 0003-0007, 1520-0477
,
Document
Cited by:
§2.3
,
§4
.
K. Emanuel (2020)
The Relevance of Theory for Contemporary Research in Atmospheres, Oceans, and Climate
.
AGU Advances
1
(
2
),
pp. e2019AV000129
.
External Links:
ISSN 2576-604X
,
Document
Cited by:
§4.2
,
§4
.
B. Freeman, R. Ruparel, and L. M. Vardoulakis (2025)
Zoom in, Zoom out, Reframe: Domain Experts’ Strategies for Addressing Non-Experts’ Complex Questions
.
In
Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
,
CHI EA ’25
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 1–7
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 9798400713958
Cited by:
§2.1
.
A. Guri
t
,
ă and R. Vatavu (2025)
Good Accessibility, Handcuffed Creativity: AI-Generated UIs Between Accessibility Guidelines and Practitioners’ Expectations
.
In
Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference
,
DIS ’25
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 1197–1209
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 9798400714856
Cited by:
§1
,
§2.1
.
K. B. Hansen and N. Thylstrup (2023)
Stack bricolage and infrastructural impermanence in financial machine-learning modelling
.
Journal of Cultural Economy
,
pp. 1–19
.
External Links:
ISSN 1753-0350, 1753-0369
,
Document
Cited by:
§2.3
,
§4.3.2
,
§5.1
,
§5.1
.
P. Henderson, R. Islam, P. Bachman, J. Pineau, D. Precup, and D. Meger (2019)
Deep Reinforcement Learning that Matters
.
arXiv
.
External Links:
1709.06560
,
Document
Cited by:
§4.3.2
,
§5.2
.
F. Hohman, K. Wongsuphasawat, M. B. Kery, and K. Patel (2020)
Understanding and Visualizing Data Iteration in Machine Learning
.
In
Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
,
CHI ’20
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 1–13
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 978-1-4503-6708-0
Cited by:
§2.1
.
J. Y. Jung, T. Steinberger, J. L. King, and M. S. Ackerman (2022)
How Domain Experts Work with Data: Situating Data Science in the Practices and Settings of Craftwork
.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact.
6
(
CSCW1
),
pp. 58:1–58:29
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§2.1
.
J. Y. Jung, T. Steinberger, and C. So (2024)
Towards Actionable Data Science: Domain Experts as End-Users of Data Science Systems
.
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW)
33
(
3
),
pp. 389–433
.
External Links:
ISSN 1573-7551
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§2.1
,
§2.1
,
§5.1
.
D. H. Kim, H. Shin, S. Yadgarova, J. Son, H. Subramonyam, and J. Kim (2024)
AINeedsPlanner: A Workbook to Support Effective Collaboration Between AI Experts and Clients
.
In
Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference
,
DIS ’24
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 728–742
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 9798400705830
Cited by:
§2.1
.
A. Kumar, A. K. Mitra, A. K. Bohra, G. R. Iyengar, and V. R. Durai (2012)
Multi-model ensemble (MME) prediction of rainfall using neural networks during monsoon season in India
.
Meteorological Applications
19
(
2
),
pp. 161–169
.
External Links:
ISSN 1469-8080
,
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
M. Lakier, A. Irwin, and D. Vogel (2025)
Understanding Marine Scientist Software Tool Use
.
In
Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
,
CHI ’25
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 1–14
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 9798400713941
Cited by:
§2.1
,
§5.1
.
R. Lam, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, M. Willson, P. Wirnsberger, M. Fortunato, F. Alet, S. Ravuri, T. Ewalds, Z. Eaton-Rosen, W. Hu, A. Merose, S. Hoyer, G. Holland, O. Vinyals, J. Stott, A. Pritzel, S. Mohamed, and P. Battaglia (2023)
GraphCast: Learning skillful medium-range global weather forecasting
.
arXiv
.
External Links:
2212.12794
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§2.4
,
§4.3.1
,
§4.3
.
S. Lang, M. Alexe, M. Chantry, J. Dramsch, F. Pinault, B. Raoult, M. C. A. Clare, C. Lessig, M. Maier-Gerber, L. Magnusson, Z. B. Bouallègue, A. P. Nemesio, P. D. Dueben, A. Brown, F. Pappenberger, and F. Rabier (2024)
AIFS – ECMWF’s data-driven forecasting system
.
arXiv
.
External Links:
2406.01465
,
Document
Cited by:
§4.3
.
C. P. Lee, M. K. Lee, and B. Mutlu (2024)
The AI-DEC: A Card-based Design Method for User-centered AI Explanations
.
In
Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference
,
DIS ’24
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 1010–1028
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 9798400705830
Cited by:
§2.1
.
T. Liao, R. Taori, I. D. Raji, and L. Schmidt (2022)
Are We Learning Yet? A Meta Review of Evaluation Failures Across Machine Learning
.
In
Thirty-Fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2)
,
Cited by:
§4.3.2
,
§5.2
.
C. K. Lin and S. J. Jackson (2023)
From Bias to Repair: Error as a Site of Collaboration and Negotiation in Applied Data Science Work
.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction
7
(
CSCW1
),
pp. 131:1–131:32
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§5.2
.
E. N. Lorenz (1963)
Deterministic Nonperiodic Flow
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
20
(
2
),
pp. 130–141
.
External Links:
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
,
Document
Cited by:
§5.2
.
Y. Mao, D. Wang, M. Muller, K. R. Varshney, I. Baldini, C. Dugan, and A. Mojsilović (2019)
How Data Scientists Work Together With Domain Experts in Scientific Collaborations: To Find The Right Answer Or To Ask The Right Question?
.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact.
3
(
GROUP
),
pp. 237:1–237:23
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§2.1
,
§2.1
.
M. Minsky (1961)
Steps toward Artificial Intelligence
.
Proceedings of the IRE
49
(
1
),
pp. 8–30
.
External Links:
ISSN 2162-6634
,
Document
Cited by:
§2.3
.
D. Narayan (2022)
Platform capitalism and cloud infrastructure: Theorizing a hyper-scalable computing regime
.
Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space
54
(
5
),
pp. 911–929
.
External Links:
ISSN 0308-518X
,
Document
Cited by:
§2.3
.
A. B. Neang, W. Sutherland, M. W. Beach, and C. P. Lee (2021)
Data Integration as Coordination: The Articulation of Data Work in an Ocean Science Collaboration
.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact.
4
(
CSCW3
),
pp. 256:1–256:25
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§2.1
.
A. B. Neang, W. Sutherland, D. Ribes, and C. P. Lee (2023)
Organizing Oceanographic Infrastructure: The Work of Making a Software Pipeline Repurposable
.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact.
7
(
CSCW1
),
pp. 79:1–79:18
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§2.1
.
OpenAI, J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya, F. L. Aleman, D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman, S. Anadkat, R. Avila, I. Babuschkin, S. Balaji, V. Balcom, P. Baltescu, H. Bao, M. Bavarian, J. Belgum, I. Bello, J. Berdine, G. Bernadett-Shapiro, C. Berner, L. Bogdonoff, O. Boiko, M. Boyd, A. Brakman, G. Brockman, T. Brooks, M. Brundage, K. Button, T. Cai, R. Campbell, A. Cann, B. Carey, C. Carlson, R. Carmichael, B. Chan, C. Chang, F. Chantzis, D. Chen, S. Chen, R. Chen, J. Chen, M. Chen, B. Chess, C. Cho, C. Chu, H. W. Chung, D. Cummings, J. Currier, Y. Dai, C. Decareaux, T. Degry, N. Deutsch, D. Deville, A. Dhar, D. Dohan, S. Dowling, S. Dunning, A. Ecoffet, A. Eleti, T. Eloundou, D. Farhi, L. Fedus, N. Felix, S. P. Fishman, J. Forte, I. Fulford, L. Gao, E. Georges, C. Gibson, V. Goel, T. Gogineni, G. Goh, R. Gontijo-Lopes, J. Gordon, M. Grafstein, S. Gray, R. Greene, J. Gross, S. S. Gu, Y. Guo, C. Hallacy, J. Han, J. Harris, Y. He, M. Heaton, J. Heidecke, C. Hesse, A. Hickey, W. Hickey, P. Hoeschele, B. Houghton, K. Hsu, S. Hu, X. Hu, J. Huizinga, S. Jain, S. Jain, J. Jang, A. Jiang, R. Jiang, H. Jin, D. Jin, S. Jomoto, B. Jonn, H. Jun, T. Kaftan, Ł. Kaiser, A. Kamali, I. Kanitscheider, N. S. Keskar, T. Khan, L. Kilpatrick, J. W. Kim, C. Kim, Y. Kim, H. Kirchner, J. Kiros, M. Knight, D. Kokotajlo, Ł. Kondraciuk, A. Kondrich, A. Konstantinidis, K. Kosic, G. Krueger, V. Kuo, M. Lampe, I. Lan, T. Lee, J. Leike, J. Leung, D. Levy, C. M. Li, R. Lim, M. Lin, S. Lin, M. Litwin, T. Lopez, R. Lowe, P. Lue, A. Makanju, K. Malfacini, S. Manning, T. Markov, Y. Markovski, B. Martin, K. Mayer, A. Mayne, B. McGrew, S. M. McKinney, C. McLeavey, P. McMillan, J. McNeil, D. Medina, A. Mehta, J. Menick, L. Metz, A. Mishchenko, P. Mishkin, V. Monaco, E. Morikawa, D. Mossing, T. Mu, M. Murati, O. Murk, D. Mély, A. Nair, R. Nakano, R. Nayak, A. Neelakantan, R. Ngo, H. Noh, L. Ouyang, C. O’Keefe, J. Pachocki, A. Paino, J. Palermo, A. Pantuliano, G. Parascandolo, J. Parish, E. Parparita, A. Passos, M. Pavlov, A. Peng, A. Perelman, F. d. A. B. Peres, M. Petrov, H. P. d. O. Pinto, Michael, Pokorny, M. Pokrass, V. Pong, T. Powell, A. Power, B. Power, E. Proehl, R. Puri, A. Radford, J. Rae, A. Ramesh, C. Raymond, F. Real, K. Rimbach, C. Ross, B. Rotsted, H. Roussez, N. Ryder, M. Saltarelli, T. Sanders, S. Santurkar, G. Sastry, H. Schmidt, D. Schnurr, J. Schulman, D. Selsam, K. Sheppard, T. Sherbakov, J. Shieh, S. Shoker, P. Shyam, S. Sidor, E. Sigler, M. Simens, J. Sitkin, K. Slama, I. Sohl, B. Sokolowsky, Y. Song, N. Staudacher, F. P. Such, N. Summers, I. Sutskever, J. Tang, N. Tezak, M. Thompson, P. Tillet, A. Tootoonchian, E. Tseng, P. Tuggle, N. Turley, J. Tworek, J. F. C. Uribe, A. Vallone, A. Vijayvergiya, C. Voss, C. Wainwright, J. J. Wang, A. Wang, B. Wang, J. Ward, J. Wei, C. J. Weinmann, A. Welihinda, P. Welinder, J. Weng, L. Weng, M. Wiethoff, D. Willner, C. Winter, S. Wolrich, H. Wong, L. Workman, S. Wu, J. Wu, M. Wu, K. Xiao, T. Xu, S. Yoo, K. Yu, Q. Yuan, W. Zaremba, R. Zellers, C. Zhang, M. Zhang, S. Zhao, T. Zheng, J. Zhuang, W. Zhuk, and B. Zoph (2023)
GPT-4 Technical Report
.
arXiv
.
External Links:
2303.08774
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Passi and S. J. Jackson (2018)
Trust in Data Science: Collaboration, Translation, and Accountability in Corporate Data Science Projects
.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction
2
(
CSCW
),
pp. 1–28
.
External Links:
ISSN 2573-0142
,
Document
Cited by:
§5.2
.
J. Pathak, S. Subramanian, P. Harrington, S. Raja, A. Chattopadhyay, M. Mardani, T. Kurth, D. Hall, Z. Li, K. Azizzadenesheli, P. Hassanzadeh, K. Kashinath, and A. Anandkumar (2022)
FourCastNet: A Global Data-driven High-resolution Weather Model using Adaptive Fourier Neural Operators
.
arXiv
.
External Links:
2202.11214
,
Document
Cited by:
§2.4
,
§4.3.1
,
§4.3
.
L. Pei (2025)
Scalar Devices of a Global Movement of Gig Worker Activists
.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact.
9
(
7
),
pp. CSCW473:1–CSCW473:22
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
footnote 1
.
Z. Pu and E. Kalnay (2018)
Numerical Weather Prediction Basics: Models, Numerical Methods, and Data Assimilation
.
In
Handbook of Hydrometeorological Ensemble Forecasting
,
pp. 1–31
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 978-3-642-40457-3
Cited by:
§2.2
.
C. S. Ramage (1971)
Monsoon meteorology
.
Academic Press
.
Cited by:
§2.2
,
§4.2.2
,
§4.2
.
D. Ribes and T. Finholt (2009)
The Long Now of Technology Infrastructure: Articulating Tensions in Development
.
Journal of the Association for Information Systems
10
(
5
).
External Links:
ISSN 1536-9323
,
Document
Cited by:
§2.1
.
D. Ribes, A. S. Hoffman, S. C. Slota, and G. C. Bowker (2019)
The logic of domains
.
Social Studies of Science
49
(
3
),
pp. 281–309
.
External Links:
ISSN 0306-3127
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§3
.
D. Ribes (2014a)
Ethnography of scaling, or, how to a fit a national research infrastructure in the room
.
In
Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing
,
CSCW ’14
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 158–170
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 978-1-4503-2540-0
Cited by:
§2.1
.
D. Ribes (2014b)
The kernel of a research infrastructure
.
In
Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing
,
CSCW ’14
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 574–587
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 978-1-4503-2540-0
Cited by:
§2.1
.
N. Sambasivan, S. Kapania, H. Highfill, D. Akrong, P. Paritosh, and L. M. Aroyo (2021)
“Everyone wants to do the model work, not the data work”: Data Cascades in High-Stakes AI
.
In
Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
,
CHI ’21
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 1–15
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 978-1-4503-8096-6
Cited by:
§2.1
.
N. Sambasivan and R. Veeraraghavan (2022)
The Deskilling of Domain Expertise in AI Development
.
In
Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
,
CHI ’22
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 1–14
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 978-1-4503-9157-3
Cited by:
§2.1
,
§5.1
.
J. Schmid, T. Sytsma, and A. Shenk (2024)
Evaluating Natural Monopoly Conditions in the AI Foundation Model Market
.
RAND
.
Cited by:
§2.3
.
J. C. Scott (1998)
Seeing like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed
.
Yale University Press
,
New Haven, CT London
.
External Links:
ISBN 978-0-300-07815-2
Cited by:
§2.2
.
N. Seaver (2021)
Care and Scale: Decorrelative Ethics in Algorithmic Recommendation
.
Cultural Anthropology
36
(
3
),
pp. 509–537
.
External Links:
ISSN 1548-1360
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§2.3
,
§2
.
D. Shin, T. Chen, G. Hsieh, and L. L. Wang (2025)
What About My Design Context?: Exploring the Use of Generative AI to Support Customization of Translational Research Artifacts
.
In
Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference
,
DIS ’25
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 1210–1227
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 9798400714856
Cited by:
§2.1
.
D. Showkat and E. P. S. Baumer (2022)
“It’s Like the Value System in the Loop”: Domain Experts’ Values Expectations for NLP Automation
.
In
Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference
,
DIS ’22
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 100–122
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 978-1-4503-9358-4
Cited by:
§1
.
P. Singh and B. Borah (2013)
Indian summer monsoon rainfall prediction using artificial neural network
.
Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment
27
(
7
),
pp. 1585–1599
.
External Links:
ISSN 1436-3259
,
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
S. B. Steinhardt and S. J. Jackson (2014)
Material Engagements: Putting Plans and Things Together in Collaborative Ocean Science
.
In
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
,
pp. 1505–1514
.
External Links:
ISSN 1530-1605
,
Document
Cited by:
§2.1
.
R. B. Stull (2012)
An Introduction to Boundary Layer Meteorology
.
Springer Science & Business Media
.
External Links:
ISBN 978-94-009-3027-8
Cited by:
§4.1
.
R. Sutton (2019)
The Bitter Lesson
.
Cited by:
§2.3
,
§4.2.2
.
D. Thakkar, A. Ismail, P. Kumar, A. Hanna, N. Sambasivan, and N. Kumar (2022)
When is Machine Learning Data Good?: Valuing in Public Health Datafication
.
In
Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
,
CHI ’22
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 1–16
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 978-1-4503-9157-3
Cited by:
§2.1
,
§4.2
.
The Economist (2024)
How AI is revolutionising science
.
Cited by:
1st item
.
A. L. Tsing (2011)
Friction: An Ethnography of Global Connection
.
Princeton University Press
,
Princeton
.
External Links:
ISBN 978-1-4008-3059-6
Cited by:
§1
,
§4.3.2
,
§4.3
,
§5.1
.
A. L. Tsing (2012)
On Nonscalability: The Living World Is Not Amenable to Precision-Nested Scales
.
Common Knowledge
18
(
3
),
pp. 505–524
.
External Links:
ISSN 0961-754X
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§2.2
,
§2
.
A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin (2023)
Attention Is All You Need
.
arXiv
.
External Links:
1706.03762
,
Document
Cited by:
§2.3
.
B. Wang, L. Zheng, D. L. Liu, F. Ji, A. Clark, and Q. Yu (2018)
Using multi-model ensembles of CMIP5 global climate models to reproduce observed monthly rainfall and temperature with machine learning methods in Australia
.
International Journal of Climatology
38
(
13
),
pp. 4891–4902
.
External Links:
ISSN 1097-0088
,
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
L. Wang, C. L. Anyi, K. Xu, Y. Liu, R. I. Arriaga, and A. K. Goel (2025)
Explainable AI for Daily Scenarios from End-Users’ Perspective: Non-Use, Concerns, and Ideal Design
.
In
Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference
,
DIS ’25
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 2328–2349
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 9798400714856
Cited by:
§1
.
J. Wei, Y. Tay, R. Bommasani, C. Raffel, B. Zoph, S. Borgeaud, D. Yogatama, M. Bosma, D. Zhou, D. Metzler, E. H. Chi, T. Hashimoto, O. Vinyals, P. Liang, J. Dean, and W. Fedus (2022)
Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models
.
Transactions on Machine Learning Research
.
External Links:
ISSN 2835-8856
Cited by:
§4.1
,
§4.3.1
.
M. Whittaker (2021)
The Steep Cost of Capture
.
SSRN Scholarly Paper
,
Rochester, NY
.
Cited by:
§2.3
.
D. G. Widder, S. West, and M. Whittaker (2023)
Open (For Business): Big Tech, Concentrated Power, and the Political Economy of Open AI
.
SSRN Scholarly Paper
,
Rochester, NY
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§2.3
.
J. J. Wong (2023)
The Politics of Scale and Scaling in Contemporary Chinese Governance and Venture Capitalism
.
Ph.D. Thesis
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§2.3
,
§2
.
Q. Yang, A. Steinfeld, C. Rosé, and J. Zimmerman (2020)
Re-examining Whether, Why, and How Human-AI Interaction Is Uniquely Difficult to Design
.
In
Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
,
CHI ’20
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 1–13
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 978-1-4503-6708-0
Cited by:
§2.1
.
N. Yildirim, C. Oh, D. Sayar, K. Brand, S. Challa, V. Turri, N. Crosby Walton, A. E. Wong, J. Forlizzi, J. McCann, and J. Zimmerman (2023)
Creating Design Resources to Scaffold the Ideation of AI Concepts
.
In
Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference
,
DIS ’23
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 2326–2346
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 978-1-4503-9893-0
Cited by:
§1
,
§2.1
.
D. W. Yoo, A. M. Stroud, X. Zhu, J. E. Miller, and B. Barry (2025)
Toward Patient-Centered AI Fact Labels: Leveraging Extrinsic Trust Cues
.
In
Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference
,
DIS ’25
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 676–690
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 9798400714856
Cited by:
§1
.
A. Zhang, Z. C. Lipton, M. Li, and A. J. Smola (2024)
Dive into Deep Learning
.
Cambridge University Press
,
Cambridge New York Port Melbourne New Delhi Singapore
.
External Links:
ISBN 978-1-00-938943-3
Cited by:
§1
,
§2.3
,
§4.1
,
§4.2
.
B. Z. Zhang, O. L. Haimson, and M. Thomas (2022)
The Chinese Diaspora and The Attempted WeChat Ban: Platform Precarity, Anticipated Impacts, and Infrastructural Migration
.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact.
6
(
CSCW2
),
pp. 397:1–397:29
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§2.1
,
§5.1
.
S. Zhong, B. A. Aseniero, A. I. Groom, A. Harsuvanakit, B. J. Lee, D. Zhao, and D. Benjamin (2025)
Towards Interactive AI-assisted Material Selection for Sustainable Building Design
.
In
Companion Publication of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference
,
pp. 567–573
.
External Links:
ISBN 9798400714863
Cited by:
§2.1
.
P. Ziegler and S. E. Chasins (2023)
A Need-Finding Study with Users of Geospatial Data
.
In
Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
,
CHI ’23
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 1–16
.
External Links:
Document
,
ISBN 978-1-4503-9421-5
Cited by:
§2.1
.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA