Degradation-aware Predictive Energy Management for Fuel Cell-Battery Ship Power System with Data-driven Load Forecasting
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
2
System description
2.1
Original System
2.2
System Retrofit
3
Power System Model
3.1
Fuel Cell
3.2
Energy Storage System
3.3
State Space Modeling
3.4
Hydrogen Consumption
3.5
FC degradation
3.6
Cost Model
4
Load Forecasting
4.1
Problem Description and Available Data
4.2
Methods
4.3
Application to Case Study
5
Power System Control
5.1
Filter-based Control
5.2
ECMS
5.2.1
Equivalent Cost of Stored Energy
5.2.2
Dynamic Costs
5.3
MPC
5.3.1
Optimization Problem
6
Numerical Investigations
6.1
Rectangular Load Profile
6.2
Mission Simulation
6.3
Variation of Prediction Horizon
7
Conclusions
References
License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0
arXiv:2604.14994v1 [eess.SY] 16 Apr 2026
\cormark
[1]
1]organization=Department of Maritime and Transport Technology, Delft University of Technology,
addressline=Mekelweg 2,
city=2628 CD Delft,
country=The Netherlands
2]organization=Department of Informatics, Bioengineering, Robotics and Systems Engineering, Università degli Studi di Genova,
addressline=Via Dodecaneso 35,
city=16146 Genova,
country=Italy
\cortext
[cor1]Corresponding author: t.kopka@tudelft.nl
Degradation-aware Predictive Energy Management for Fuel Cell-Battery Ship Power System with Data-driven Load Forecasting
Timon Kopka
t.kopka@tudelft.nl
Sara Tamburello
Luca Oneto
Lindert van Biert
Henk Polinder
Andrea Coraddu
[
[
Abstract
Hydrogen-based zero-emission ships are a key element in the decarbonization of the maritime sector.
To strengthen these systems’ economic competitiveness, it is key to drive their costs to a minimum.
Current literature mainly focuses on fuel consumption minimization, but there is a lack of explicit consideration of costs arising from cell degradation and optimization-based approaches that leverage information on future load trajectories.
This work aims at minimizing the operational cost of fuel cell(FC)-battery hybrid shipboard power systems, accounting for hydrogen consumption and cell degradation as the main cost drivers.
A degradation-aware predictive energy management strategy (EMS) utilizing data-driven load forecasting is designed and showcased at the example of a virtually retrofitted harbor tug.
This work shows that the real onboard measurements of the vessel can be utilized to make accurate load predictions over 15min.
Results indicate that the degradation-aware, predictive control simultaneously reduces the hydrogen consumption by up to
5.8
%
5.8\text{\,}\%
and the cell degradation by up to
36.4
%
36.4\text{\,}\%
with an aged FC system when compared to a filter-based benchmark applied to real operating data of the harbor tug.
With an increased prediction horizon of
1
h
1\text{\,}\mathrm{h}
, further significant reductions of
3.8
%
3.8\text{\,}\%
and
14.0
%
14.0\text{\,}\%
could be shown.
keywords:
Energy Management
\sep
Fuel Cells
\sep
Model Predictive Control
\sep
Shipboard Power Systems
\sep
Time-Series Forecasting
\sep
Zero-Emission Ships
1
Introduction
Electrification and hybridization are two key enablers for increasing the operational flexibility and capability of onboard energy systems in ships
Nuchturee et al.
(
2020
)
.
Fuel cells (FCs)
are a prominent candidate for the replacement of conventional diesel engines as main generators, aiming at the decarbonization of maritime transport
Shakeri et al.
(
2020
)
.
Energy storage systems (ESSs)
allow for the decoupling of the load and generation, making it possible to operate the main supplies more steadily and efficiently, while high power gradients and power peaks can be compensated by, e.g., batteries
Mutarraf et al.
(
2018
)
.
This can be especially beneficial in ship types whose load profile is highly volatile, changing quickly within a short time frame, e.g. harbor tugs.
One fundamental line of research for hybrid vessels is the coordination of the generation and storage systems, as the batteries introduce additional degrees-of-freedom for the control system.
The main challenge for the
energy management strategy (EMS)
is the optimal dispatch of power sources over time, ensuring that each component- and system-level constraints are respected
Geertsma et al.
(
2017
)
.
Typically, the
EMS
aims at the minimization of the fuel consumption, while ensuring that the load power can always be supplied by the generation side
Jaurola et al.
(
2019
)
.
However, with the introduction of
FCs
, an additional key performance criterion is the cell degradation, which is required to be minimized such that their lifetime is extended, keeping stack replacement costs low
Shakeri et al.
(
2020
);
Wallnöfer-Ogris et al.
(
2024
)
.
Hence, the optimal energy management of
FC
-battery
shipboard power system (SPS)
poses a multi-objective optimization problem.
In the literature, a multitude of approaches attempts to solve this problem.
Generally, methods can be divided into heuristic and optimization-based approaches
Xie et al.
(
2022
)
.
Many studies on the energy management for
FC
-battery based
SPS
focus on PI or filter-based controllers
Balestra and
Schjølberg
(
2021a
,
b
);
Kopka et al.
(
2025
)
to achieve peak-shaving for steady
FC
operation or on efficiency improvement via rule-based controllers
Han et al.
(
2014
);
Bassam et al.
(
2016
)
.
Similarly, fuzzy-logic controllers are utilized to translate expert insights into rules for a functioning
EMS
Zhu et al.
(
2014
);
Zhao
(
2022
)
.
More advanced
EMSs
are optimization-based, which can either be instantaneous or predictive, where the latter attempts to include knowledge of future system states and disturbances, e.g. the load power, in the solution of the energy management problem.
An example of instantaneous optimization is
equivalent consumption minimization strategy (ECMS)
, which conventionally is applied to hybridized diesel-based power systems
Sciarretta and Guzzella
(
2007
);
Grimmelius
(
2011
);
Yuan et al.
(
2016
)
, but has also been shown to be applicable to zero-emission ships
Zhang et al.
(
2020
);
Kopka et al.
(
2023a
)
.
Xiang and Yang
(
2021
)
shows the implementation of
ECMS
for multi-objective optimization.
The advantage of instantaneous optimization is that no knowledge of future system disturbances is required.
However, in case a prediction of the future mission profile is possible, it can be incorporated in the
EMS
to improve the controller performance and explicitly include system limitations.
An example of this is the use of
model predictive control (MPC)
, which can be utilized in various functions, such as optimal control of parallel prime movers
Paran et al.
(
2015
)
, and optimal power split for hybrid systems
Haseltalab and
Negenborn
(
2019
);
Khazaei
(
2021
)
.
Xie et al.
(
2021
)
and
Antonopoulos et al.
(
2021
)
formulate
ECMS
implementations whose parameters are set by overarching predictive or mission-scale optimizers.
MPC
is commonly implemented in multiple layers, decomposing the optimization problem into varying timescales.
Haseltalab and
Negenborn
(
2019
);
Zhang et al.
(
2022
)
decouple the optimal steady-state dispatch from the dynamic power sharing in two-level
MPC
formulations whereas a three-level implementation is proposed by
Seenumani et al.
(
2010
)
.
Predictive energy management for zero-emission ships is much less investigated. In
Banaei et al.
(
2020b
,
a
)
an
MPC
is applied to determine the steady-state economic dispatch for a zero-emission ferry.
The work in
Banaei et al.
(
2021
)
further incorporates
FC
degradation as an objective.
However, the mentioned applications for
FC
-battery systems apply the optimization for large time steps while assuming a mission-scale quantification of load uncertainties. This disregards both the highly fluctuating load dynamics, as well as the optimal power split in dynamic conditions and uncertainties between predicted and actual load.
Most studies dedicated to the optimized control of hydrogen-based
SPS
only optimize for fuel consumption.
Besides the cost of hydrogen, the cell degradation and eventual stack replacement of the
FCs
, as well as increased consumption due to degradation, are key drivers of the overall operating costs of a hydrogen
FC
-based system.
An explicit quantification of the cell degradation and its minimization during dynamic operation is done by
Fletcher et al.
(
2016
)
. Similarly,
Bassam et al.
(
2017
)
analyzes the cell degradation for various rule-based
EMS
in an
SPS
. However, these studies lack an attempt to quantify the costs arising from the cell degradation and, furthermore, do not include their degradation function in a predictive
EMS
.
The implementation of an
MPC
requires an estimate of future states, inputs and/or disturbances.
Many sources assume perfect knowledge of future load to showcase the effectiveness of predictive control.
Typically, this approach leads to promising results.
However, in practice, knowledge of future system states and disturbances is limited.
Accordingly, real systems require designers of a predictive
EMS
to develop methods for predicting the load, which can be based on heuristics, arise from the mission planning, or be based on operational data.
A promising approach is the utilization of data-driven techniques for predicting the load profile over a certain time interval into the future, denoted as the prediction horizon.
This challenge can be characterized as a Time Series Forecasting (TSF) problem
Lim and Zohren
(
2021
);
Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David
(
2014
);
Bishop and Bishop
(
2023
)
.
Many approaches exist for solving TSF
Lim and Zohren
(
2021
);
Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David
(
2014
);
Bishop and Bishop
(
2023
)
.
Classical methods such as Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) and Exponential Smoothing often yield good results
Hyndman
(
2018
)
, but Machine Learning (ML) has become an increasingly attractive option due to its potential to improve model accuracy and scale to larger datasets with higher dimensionalities.
ML models can be broadly categorized into two main families.
The first is Shallow ML, which can achieve reasonably good performance with small to medium-sized datasets, provided that domain-specific features are carefully engineered
Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David
(
2014
)
.
The second family, Deep ML, can automatically learn features, i.e., representations without the need for manual feature engineering.
However, leveraging Deep ML models can be challenging due to the large number of architectural design choices and the substantial amount of data required
Bishop and Bishop
(
2023
)
.
Recent studies have demonstrated that ML-based approaches, particularly those using Deep ML, can outperform classical methods on a variety of TSF tasks
Oreshkin et al.
(
2019
);
Salinas et al.
(
2020
)
.
Unfortunately, Deep ML models rely on massive labeled datasets, and constructing such datasets is challenging due to limited data availability (i.e., data may not be available at all) or high data annotation costs (i.e., data must be labeled by humans).
To address these challenges, Foundation Models (FMs), such as Large Language Models in Natural Language Processing
Zhao et al.
(
2023
)
and advanced models in Computer Vision
Awais et al.
(
2023
)
, have emerged as powerful paradigms capable of achieving state-of-the-art performance in their respective fields.
The success of these FMs stems from their ability to leverage vast amounts of data to learn general-purpose representations, enabling them to be fine-tuned or even used directly in a zero-shot manner across a diverse range of downstream tasks
Gruver et al.
(
2024
)
.
This approach not only reduces the need for task-specific model development but also encapsulates a broad understanding of the world, endowing these models with exceptional versatility and efficiency.
Motivated by this success, researchers have started exploring the development of Time Series Foundation Models (TSFMs) to harness the potential of the foundation model paradigm for time series data.
By capitalizing on large-scale time series datasets, TSFMs aim to achieve superior performance across a variety of TSF tasks, offering a unified framework that can accelerate research and application development in this field
Liang et al.
(
2024
)
.
The no-free-lunch theorem
Adam et al.
(
2019
)
asserts that identifying the optimal algorithm for a specific application requires evaluating multiple approaches.
This work formulates an
MPC
that handles second-scale load fluctuations and continuously prescribes optimized power references for
FCs
and batteries considering their dynamic and steady-state constraints and operational costs.
In our work, we explored several state-of-the-art methods and, based on their performance, proposed a novel approach that combines their strengths.
In our work, we propose the following contributions to address the gaps which have been identified in the literature and the state-of-the art for predictive energy management of hydrogen-based
SPS
:
•
First, a degradation-aware optimization for a
FC
-battery hybrid
SPS
is constructed and applied in an ECMS-based
EMS
in real-time. The optimization minimizes operational costs arising from hydrogen consumption and cell degradation as main cost drivers.
•
Second, several state-of-the art TSF methods are explored for the load forecasting of a harbor tug, utilizing the system’s available real-time measurements. Based on their performance, a novel approach that combines their strengths is proposed to provide accurate load predictions.
•
Third, the data-driven load forecasting and degradation-aware cost function are formulated in an
MPC
which explicitly minimizes the operating costs over the prediction horizon.
The remainder of this manuscript is organized as follows.
Chapter
2
introduces the original layout and measurement of the harbor tug and describes the virtual retrofit for obtaining an all-electric
FC
-battery hybrid vessel which serves as the case study in this work.
Dynamic component and system models as well as a derivation of a complete state-space model are presented in chapter
3
. Further, this chapter introduces cost functions for hydrogen consumption and cell degradation and introduces system constraints.
Chapter
4
describes the development of the data-driven load forecasting method and showcases its performance in predicting the future load of the harbor tug.
The optimization function for the degradation-aware energy management is derived in chapter
5
. Both an
ECMS
-based and a model predictive
EMS
as well as a filter-based benchmark controller are described here.
Numerical results of mission simulations for the display of performance using the proposed strategies are analyzed and discussed in chapter
6
.
Finally, chapter
7
summarizes the main conclusions of this work.
2
System description
The
EMS
developed for this study is applicable to fully electric
SPS
with
FCs
and
ESS
on the generation side. Here, a harbor tug is considered, whose operating profile is characterized by a highly volatile load, with distinct operating modes and short mission profiles.
As tugs typically operate in fleets and stay within the harbor space, they are a viable candidate for
FC
-battery systems, assuming that a hydrogen bunkering infrastructure is present.
This chapter first describes the original diesel-hybrid harbor tug and the available measured data from its operation.
In the next step, based on original design and mission requirements, virtual retrofit of the tugboat’s power system with
FCs
and batteries is described, yielding the vessel regarded in this work.
2.1
Original System
The original harbor tug is equipped with a hybrid propulsion architecture and hybrid energy system with its specifications listed in Table
1
. The main diesel engines are sized to carry the bulk of the propulsive load while the shaft motors and batteries allow for load leveling, gradient support, and full-electric operation at low load as well as a power take-off for feeding electric consumers.
Figure 1
:
Primary systems of original diesel-based SPS
Twelve months of operational data has been analyzed to determine the required power of the considered vessel for broad variety of actual mission profiles. Over this period, a total number of
167
167
missions have been logged with a logging rate of
5
s
5\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
. Decisive for the power system control, as outlined in Section
5
, is the time-dependent total power load. However, a broader array of real-time measurements is available and required for an accurate data-driven load forecasting. More detailed descriptions of the available data-sets and their utilization for the load forecasting are given in Section
4
.
Table 1
:
Specifications of original diesel-hybrid power system.
Parameter
Info
Type
Harbor tug
Length
29.0
m
29.0\text{\,}\mathrm{m}
Width
10.5
m
10.5\text{\,}\mathrm{m}
Displacement
575
t
575\text{\,}\mathrm{t}
Max. Speed
13.5
kn
13.5\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{n}
Propulsion
Diesel-hybrid
Main Engine
2x
1840
kW
1840\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}
Shaft Motor
2x
115
kW
115\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}
Auxiliary Engine
800
kW
800\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}
Battery Pack
2x
120
kWh
120\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}\mathrm{h}
Figure 2
:
Histogram of total load measured during operation of the harbor tug
Figure 3
:
Cumulative frequency of energy bursts beyond specified threshold power during assist
2.2
System Retrofit
Based on the original power system and the operational requirements, a hydrogen
FC
-based re-design has been conceptualized.
Two interconnected DC busses, each attached to an
FC
and a battery system comprises the complete energy generation system. All loads are electrified, and fed by power converters.
The resulting topology is displayed in Fig.
4
and the specifications listed in Table
2
.
Figure 4
:
Primary systems of retrofitted full electric FC-hybrid power system
Regarding the sizing of components, the total
FC
power at
end-of-life (EOL)
shall be sufficient for providing the maximum required power during assist.
The maximum measured power, safe for negligibly short peaks, is
3800
kW
3800\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}
, covering both the propulsive and auxiliary power load.
Assuming that the
EOL
power of the
FC
systems is at
90
%
90\text{\,}\%
of the system’s original power rating
Kleen and Gibbons
(
2024
)
, two proton-exchange membrane
FC
(PEMFC) systems, each with a maximum power output of
2125
kW
2125\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}
at
begin-of-life (BOL)
, are selected. This leaves a total of
3825
kW
3825\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}
available generative power before a stack replacement.
FC
systems show increased degradation at high power operation beyond
80
%
80\text{\,}\%
of their maximum rating. Hence, it is desirable to size the energy storage such that the
FCs
are rarely forced above this threshold.
At
EOL
, this amounts to
3060
kW
3060\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}
of total power from the
FCs
.
Bursts of energy that require power beyond a certain threshold
P
t
​
h
​
r
​
e
​
s
​
h
P_{thresh}
are shown in Fig.
3
. For the desired operation limit of the
FCs
, an additional energy of up to
761
kWh
761\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}\mathrm{h}
is required to cover all observed mission profiles. With an assumed depth-of-discharge of
60
%
60\text{\,}\%
, this requires
1268
kWh
1268\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}\mathrm{h}
of installed energy storage capacity. For the
ESS
sizing, we round this value to
1250
kWh
1250\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}\mathrm{h}
, distributed over two units. To achieve sufficient capability for compensating short-term power bursts, and power gradient support, a charge and discharge rating of
1.5
C
1.5\text{\,}\mathrm{C}
is sufficient. Here, we select lithium iron phosphate (LFP) batteries due to their high efficiency and stable degradation behavior.
Table 2
:
Specifications of re-designed full-electric FC-battery power system.
Parameter
Info
Type
Harbor tug
Propulsion
Full-electric
Fuel Cells
2x
2125
kW
2125\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}
(BOL)
Battery Pack
2x
625
kWh
625\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}\mathrm{h}
(BOL)
Propulsion Motors
2x
1840
kW
1840\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}
3
Power System Model
This section describes the dynamic models used for the primary components of the
SPS
which encompasses the
FC
, the
ESS
, electric load and the power distribution system.
From these models, a state-space representation of the complete system is derived, to be used for the optimization-based formulation of the system’s energy management.
In addition, approximations of the hydrogen consumption and the cell degradation of the
FCs
, and a cost model for aggregating both factors in the operating costs are described.
Figure 5
:
Simulation models for the PEMFC (a) and battery (b) including current-controlled power electronics converter
Table 3
:
Fuel Cell and Battery Parameters
Parameter
Description
Value
P
f
​
c
,
m
​
a
​
x
P_{fc,max}
Max. net FC power
4150
kW
4150\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}
P
˙
f
​
c
,
m
​
a
​
x
\dot{P}_{fc,max}
Max. FC power gradient
212.5
kW
/
s
212.5\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}\mathrm{/}\mathrm{s}
R
i
,
f
​
c
R_{i,fc}
FC resistance (BOL/EOL)
23.2
23.2\text{\,}
/
28.0
m
​
Ω
28.0\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\Omega
C
b
​
a
​
t
C_{bat}
Battery Capacity
3125
Ah
3125\text{\,}\mathrm{A}\mathrm{h}
R
i
,
b
​
a
​
t
R_{i,bat}
Bat. internal resistance
2.4
m
​
Ω
2.4\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\Omega
I
b
​
a
​
t
,
m
​
a
​
x
I_{bat,max}
Maximum current
9.4
kA
9.4\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{A}
3.1
Fuel Cell
In this work PEM
FCs
serve as main power generation devices.
The equivalent circuit of the simulation model consisting of an equivalent voltage source and internal resistance is shown in Fig.
5
a), as proposed by
Njoya et al.
(
2009
)
for dynamic simulation of
FC
-based systems.
The voltage source
e
f
​
c
e_{fc}
is current-dependent and computed as
e
f
​
c
​
(
i
f
​
c
)
=
E
o
​
c
,
f
​
c
−
N
s
,
f
​
c
​
E
t
​
s
​
l
​
n
​
(
i
f
​
c
N
s
,
f
​
c
​
I
0
)
⋅
1
s
​
T
d
/
3
+
1
e_{fc}(i_{fc})=E_{oc,fc}-N_{s,fc}E_{ts}ln(\frac{i_{fc}}{N_{s,fc}I_{0}})\cdot\frac{1}{sT_{d}/3+1}
(1)
where stack settling time
T
d
T_{d}
, Tafel slope
E
t
​
s
E_{ts}
, exchange current
I
0
I_{0}
, number of series-connected cells
N
s
,
f
​
c
N_{s,fc}
, and open circuit voltage
E
o
​
c
,
f
​
c
E_{oc,fc}
, as well as the internal resistance
R
i
,
f
​
c
R_{i,fc}
, accounting for the linear voltage decrease, are extracted from the manufacturer datasheet
Nedstack
(
2023
)
according to the method described by
Njoya et al.
(
2009
)
.
With this parameterization, the output voltage
v
f
​
c
v_{fc}
follows the polarization curve of the PEM
FC
module as described in its datasheet. Table
3
lists the
FC
model parameters. The voltage and power curves over output current for the system at
BOL
and
EOL
are shown in Fig.
6
.
Figure 6
:
PEMFC voltage
v
f
​
c
v_{fc}
and net output power as functions of output current
i
f
​
c
i_{fc}
for BOL and EOL conditions
3.2
Energy Storage System
An LFP battery system is integrated into the power system as
ESS
.
The simulation model, proposed by
Tremblay et al.
(
2007
)
, is similar to the
FC
model and is shown in Fig.
5
b). Here, the equivalent voltage source
e
b
​
a
​
t
e_{bat}
is depending on the battery
state-of-charge (SoC)
, which is calculated via Coulomb counting.
The system is parameterized based on the manufacturer datasheet
RS-PRO
and its open-circuit voltage is displayed in Fig.
7
.
The battery model parameters are shown in Table
3
.
The LFP technology is characterized by its flat
SoC
-dependency curve. This enables the approximation of the open-circuit voltage with a constant value
E
o
​
c
=
e
b
​
a
​
t
​
(
ξ
b
​
a
​
t
=
50
%
)
E_{oc}=e_{bat}(\xi_{bat}=50\%)
.
Figure 7
:
Open-circuit voltage of LFP battery system
3.3
State Space Modeling
For the energy management, the control model of the
SPS
is simplified as a single-node system connected to a PEM
FC
, a battery, and an aggregated electric load, as shown in Fig.
8
.
The
FC
model generates an estimate of hydrogen consumption
m
˙
H
​
2
\dot{m}_{H2}
and cell voltage degradation
Δ
​
V
d
​
e
​
g
\Delta V_{deg}
, as described in the modeling section
3
.
Both values are taken into account as objectives to be minimized in the energy management.
Furthermore, the PEM
FC
and the LiFePO battery feed power into the bus, denoted as
p
f
​
c
p_{fc}
and
p
b
​
a
​
t
p_{bat}
, respectively.
We define the
FC
power
p
f
​
c
p_{fc}
and the battery
SoC
ξ
b
​
a
​
t
\xi_{bat}
as system states.
Our control input is the
FC
power gradient
p
˙
f
​
c
\dot{p}_{fc}
.
Whereas
p
f
​
c
p_{fc}
must always be
≥
0
\geq 0
,
p
b
​
a
​
t
p_{bat}
may be negative, indicating a charging of the battery. Furthermore, a limit is set on the input, i.e.,
p
˙
f
​
c
\dot{p}_{fc}
. Hence, system inputs and states must adhere to the following constraints
|
p
˙
f
​
c
​
(
n
)
|
≤
P
˙
f
​
c
,
m
​
a
​
x
|\dot{p}_{fc}(n)|\leq\dot{P}_{fc,max}
(2)
0
≤
p
f
​
c
​
(
n
)
≤
P
f
​
c
,
m
​
a
​
x
0\leq p_{fc}(n)\leq P_{fc,max}
(3)
S
​
o
​
C
m
​
i
​
n
≤
ξ
​
(
n
)
≤
S
​
o
​
C
m
​
a
​
x
∀
n
∈
[
k
,
k
+
N
]
SoC_{min}\leq\xi(n)\leq SoC_{max}\quad\forall\quad n\in[k,k+N]
(4)
The
FC
power dynamics are simply computed as
p
f
​
c
​
(
n
+
1
)
=
p
f
​
c
​
(
n
)
+
p
˙
f
​
c
​
(
n
)
​
T
s
p_{fc}(n+1)=p_{fc}(n)+\dot{p}_{fc}(n)T_{s}
(5)
where
T
s
T_{s}
is the discretization interval.
The power generation must always be in balance with the load power
p
l
​
o
​
a
​
d
p_{load}
. The latter is modeled as an external disturbance and since
p
f
​
c
p_{fc}
is defined as a system state, we can compute the battery power and current as
p
b
​
a
​
t
​
(
n
)
=
p
l
​
o
​
a
​
d
​
(
n
)
−
p
f
​
c
​
(
n
)
−
T
s
2
​
p
˙
f
​
c
​
(
n
)
p_{bat}(n)=p_{load}(n)-p_{fc}(n)-\frac{T_{s}}{2}\dot{p}_{fc}(n)
(6)
i
b
​
a
​
t
​
(
n
)
=
E
o
​
c
2
​
R
i
,
b
​
a
​
t
−
−
p
b
​
a
​
t
R
i
,
b
​
a
​
t
+
(
E
o
​
c
2
​
R
i
,
b
​
a
​
t
)
2
i_{bat}(n)=\frac{E_{oc}}{2R_{i,bat}}-\sqrt{-\frac{p_{bat}}{R_{i,bat}}+(\frac{E_{oc}}{2R_{i,bat}})^{2}}
(7)
ξ
b
​
a
​
t
​
(
n
+
1
)
=
ξ
b
​
a
​
t
​
(
n
)
−
i
b
​
a
​
t
​
(
n
)
C
b
​
a
​
t
​
T
s
\xi_{bat}(n+1)=\xi_{bat}(n)-\frac{i_{bat}(n)}{C_{bat}}T_{s}
(8)
for
i
b
​
a
​
t
​
R
i
,
b
​
a
​
t
<<
E
o
​
c
i_{bat}R_{i,bat}<<E_{oc}
we can observe that
v
b
​
a
​
t
≃
E
o
​
c
v_{bat}\simeq E_{oc}
and simplify (
7
) with a linearized function for the battery current
i
b
​
a
​
t
​
(
n
)
≃
p
b
​
a
​
t
E
o
​
c
=
p
l
​
o
​
a
​
d
​
(
n
)
−
p
f
​
c
​
(
n
)
−
T
s
2
​
p
˙
f
​
c
​
(
n
)
E
o
​
c
i_{bat}(n)\simeq\frac{p_{bat}}{E_{oc}}=\frac{p_{load}(n)-p_{fc}(n)-\frac{T_{s}}{2}\dot{p}_{fc}(n)}{E_{oc}}
(9)
We can rewrite the complete system dynamics as
[
p
f
​
c
​
(
n
+
1
)
,
ξ
b
​
a
​
t
​
(
n
+
1
)
]
T
=
A
​
[
p
f
​
c
​
(
n
)
,
ξ
b
​
a
​
t
​
(
n
)
]
T
+
B
​
p
˙
f
​
c
​
(
n
)
+
B
d
​
p
l
​
o
​
a
​
d
​
(
n
)
[p_{fc}(n+1),\ \xi_{bat}(n+1)]^{T}=A[p_{fc}(n),\ \xi_{bat}(n)]^{T}+B\dot{p}_{fc}(n)+B_{d}p_{load}(n)
(10)
A
\displaystyle A
=
[
1
0
−
T
s
E
o
​
c
​
C
b
​
a
​
t
1
]
\displaystyle=\begin{bmatrix}1&0\\
\frac{-T_{s}}{E_{oc}C_{bat}}&1\\
\end{bmatrix}
B
\displaystyle B
=
[
T
s
−
T
s
2
​
E
o
​
c
​
C
b
​
a
​
t
]
\displaystyle=\begin{bmatrix}T_{s}\\
\frac{-T_{s}}{2E_{oc}C_{bat}}\\
\end{bmatrix}
B
d
\displaystyle B_{d}
=
[
0
T
s
E
o
​
c
​
C
b
​
a
​
t
]
\displaystyle=\begin{bmatrix}0\\
\frac{T_{s}}{E_{oc}C_{bat}}\\
\end{bmatrix}
(11)
Figure 8
:
Simplified one-node control model for the EMS
3.4
Hydrogen Consumption
The hydrogen consumption of the stack is directly connected to the
FC
current
I
f
​
c
,
i
​
n
I_{fc,in}
, as laid out in
Kopka et al.
(
2023a
)
.
In addition, hydrogen is lost due to hydrogen crossover and internal short-circuits in the cells
Mao et al.
(
2017
)
.
On a system level, the
FC
consumes auxiliary power for its balance-of-plant, which depends on the operation of the system
Shakeri et al.
(
2020
)
. Since it is relevant for the power balance, this work regards the
FC
power
p
f
​
c
p_{fc}
as the net delivered power, which is the power delivered by the stack minus the auxiliary power.
For the optimization-based power system control, the hydrogen consumption can be approximated with a second-order polynomial as a function of net delivered power
m
˙
H
​
2
​
(
p
f
​
c
)
\dot{m}_{H2}(p_{fc})
.
The modeled hydrogen consumption and its quadratic approximations at
BOL
and
EOL
are shown in Fig.
9
. The curves show the effect of degradation on the increased hydrogen need, which becomes especially apparent in the high power region.
Figure 9
:
Hydrogen consumption and quadratic approximation for FC system at BOL and EOL
3.5
FC degradation
Apart from the hydrogen consumption, a key performance indicator for the control is the
FC
degradation, affecting the state-of-health and lifetime of the PEM
FC
.
PEM
FC
degradation is a complex combination of mechanisms, affected by several causes, which ultimately results into a decrease of the delivered output power.
In this work, degradation is evaluated in terms of voltage decrease over time at a rated current.
On an operational level, the load is considered the main cause affecting PEM
FC
degradation.
To distinguish its effects on the PEM
FC
system, the load is typically broken down into three main categories, i.e., degradation arising from static operation, dynamic load changes, and system start-up cycles.
In literature, different degradation rates are reported for operation in low and high current operation regions, and a considerably lower static degradation in between those regions.
Representative degradation values and region limits are listed in Table
4
.
The change of degradation rate between the regions is approximated with a linear function around the region limit.
To make the static degradation function easier to handle in an optimization, it is approximated via a second-order polynomial, enforcing its convexity over the power range.
The static degradation of the
FC
over its operation range and its quadratic optimization at
BOL
and
EOL
are shown in Fig.
10
.
Since the power thresholds are relative to the maximum power, the curve is compressed towards the origin with increased degradation.
Figure 10
:
Cell-level static voltage degradation of FC system (solid) and approximation with second-order polynomial (dashed) at BOL and EOL
Table 4
:
FC Degradation Parameters (per cell)
Param.
Description
Value
Ref.
p
l
​
o
p_{lo}
Low power threshold
20
%
20\text{\,}\%
Shakeri et al.
(
2020
)
p
h
​
i
p_{hi}
High power threshold
80
%
80\text{\,}\%
Fletcher et al.
(
2016
)
d
​
v
h
​
i
dv_{hi}
High power deg. (>
p
h
​
i
p_{hi}
)
10.0
μ
​
V
/
h
10.0\text{\,}\mu\mathrm{V}\mathrm{/}\mathrm{h}
Chen et al.
(
2015
)
d
​
v
l
​
o
dv_{lo}
Low power deg. (<
p
l
​
o
p_{lo}
)
8.6
μ
​
V
/
h
8.6\text{\,}\mu\mathrm{V}\mathrm{/}\mathrm{h}
Chen et al.
(
2015
)
d
​
v
b
​
a
​
s
​
e
dv_{base}
Base degradation
2.0
μ
​
V
/
h
2.0\text{\,}\mu\mathrm{V}\mathrm{/}\mathrm{h}
de Bruijn et al.
(
2008
)
d
​
v
d
​
y
​
n
dv_{dyn}
Dynamic degradation
0.5
⋅
0.5\cdot
19
μ
​
V
19\text{\,}\mu\mathrm{V}
Meng et al.
(
2021
)
d
​
t
d
​
y
​
n
dt_{dyn}
Reference ramp time
10
s
10\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
(assumed)
The dynamic degradation is a result of load changes.
Meng et al.
(
2021
)
reports an average of
19
μ
​
V
19\text{\,}\mu\mathrm{V}
per complete power cycle from idling to full power and back.
No studies were made on the effect of the current gradient in dynamic degradation studies. However, we assume a quadratic relationship between the gradient and the degrading effect, meaning the faster the change in output current, the higher the degrading effect of the dynamic change.
For this study, we assume a reference time of
10
s
10\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
at which the reported degradation rate is realized. Additionally, the dynamic degradation is scaled linearly for partial current cycles:
d
​
V
˙
d
​
y
​
n
​
(
p
˙
f
​
c
)
=
d
​
t
d
​
y
​
n
​
d
​
v
d
​
y
​
n
P
f
​
c
,
m
​
a
​
x
2
​
p
˙
f
​
c
2
:=
d
​
v
d
​
y
​
n
​
2
​
p
˙
f
​
c
2
d\dot{V}_{dyn}(\dot{p}_{fc})=\frac{dt_{dyn}dv_{dyn}}{P_{fc,max}^{2}}\dot{p}_{fc}^{2}:=dv_{dyn2}\dot{p}_{fc}^{2}
(12)
Degradation due to start-up and shutdown cycles are disregarded in this study, since it is assumed that the
FC
is not switched during the operation, therefore not affecting the control scheme.
3.6
Cost Model
Hydrogen consumption and
FC
degradation are two objectives for the operation of the hybrid ship. It is essential to determine a suitable trade-off between these two for the design of the power system control. In this study, the related costs for both objectives are estimated to enable a comparison between the two.
The cost estimate for hydrogen
c
d
​
e
​
g
c_{deg}
is straightforward since the fuel is a traded commodity.
The cost for degradation is more difficult to define. This study estimates it as the cost of reduced lifetime due to voltage degradation.
Conventionally, a power loss of
10
%
10\text{\,}\%
at rated current compared to a new system is proposed as the end-of-life of
FC
systems in heavy duty applications with a targeted lifetime of
25 000
h
25\,000\text{\,}\mathrm{h}
Kleen and Gibbons
(
2024
)
. This is challenged by
Jouin et al.
(
2016
)
as being too restrictive and, in dynamic applications, reached considerably earlier.
Due to a lack of alternative standards, we use the limit of
10
%
10\text{\,}\%
for this study.
Accordingly, at reaching
90
%
90\text{\,}\%
of its original maximum power rating, the
FC
stack needs to be replaced. The degradation-specific cost is estimated as the partial replacement costs due to operation-specific voltage degradation:
c
d
​
e
​
g
=
r
f
​
c
,
s
​
t
​
a
​
c
​
k
​
c
f
​
c
,
c
​
a
​
p
​
e
​
x
​
P
f
​
c
,
m
​
a
​
x
​
N
s
r
e
​
o
​
l
​
V
f
​
c
,
m
​
i
​
n
c_{deg}=\frac{r_{fc,stack}c_{fc,capex}P_{fc,max}N_{s}}{r_{eol}V_{fc,min}}
(13)
A comparison of hydrogen costs, static degradation costs and total costs from static operation of the
FC
system is displayed in Fig.
11
.
The cost parameters used in this study are listed in Table
5
.
Table 5
:
Cost Parameters for hydrogen consumption and cell degradation
Parameter
Description
Value
c
h
​
2
c_{h2}
Hydrogen cost
8
€
/
kg
8\text{\,}\text{\texteuro}\mathrm{/}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{g}
c
f
​
c
,
c
​
a
​
p
​
e
​
x
c_{fc,capex}
FC system cost
1500
€
/
kW
1500\text{\,}\text{\texteuro}\mathrm{/}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}
r
f
​
c
,
s
​
t
​
a
​
c
​
k
r_{fc,stack}
FC stack cost ratio
50
%
50\text{\,}\%
r
e
​
o
​
l
r_{eol}
FC power loss at EOL
10
%
10\text{\,}\%
c
d
​
e
​
g
c_{deg}
Degradation cost
50.6
€
/
μ
​
V
50.6\text{\,}\text{\texteuro}\mathrm{/}\mu\mathrm{V}
Figure 11
:
Cost curves of hydrogen consumption and static degradation. Model data (solid) and approximations with second-order polynomials (dashed) at BOL.
4
Load Forecasting
This section deals with the problem of predicting the load power of the vessel for the future with a sampling frequency of
5
s
5\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
, matching the data-logging rate of the original measurements.
In particular, Section
4.1
will describe in detail the problem and the data available to address it while Section
4.2
will explain the proposed methods based on advanced ML techniques to solve the problem.
4.1
Problem Description and Available Data
The case study of this paper examines a vessel featuring a hybrid propulsion system that includes diesel and electric power.
The proposed methodology utilizes operational data logged by the vessel’s automation system.
The data under consideration comprises
5
5
million samples with a sampling rate of
5
5
seconds, spanning over one year of operational data, between 24th of April 2022 and 6th of May 2023.
It consists of
18
18
input features, as presented in Table
6
, where the feature total power (
p
tot
\mathrm{p_{tot}}
) is defined as the sum of power, i.e., the total power to be forecasted is obtained as
p
tot
=
(
γ
d
​
e
,
s
+
γ
d
​
e
,
p
)
​
P
d
​
e
,
m
​
a
​
x
+
γ
a
​
u
​
x
​
P
a
​
u
​
x
,
m
​
a
​
x
+
p
bat
,
s
+
p
bat
,
p
.
\mathrm{p_{tot}}=(\gamma_{de,s}+\gamma_{de,p})P_{de,max}+\gamma_{aux}P_{aux,max}+\mathrm{p_{bat,s}}+\mathrm{p_{bat,p}}.
(14)
Table 6
:
Load forecasting: available data on the original vessel.
Symbol
Definition
Unit
v
\mathrm{v}
Vessel Speed
[
knots
\mathrm{knots}
]
n
prop
,
s
\mathrm{n_{prop,s}}
Propeller Speed - Starboard
[
rpm
\mathrm{rpm}
]
n
prop
,
p
\mathrm{n_{prop,p}}
Propeller Speed - Port
[
rpm
\mathrm{rpm}
]
n
em
,
s
\mathrm{n_{em,s}}
Electric motor speed - Starboard
[
rpm
\mathrm{rpm}
]
n
em
,
p
\mathrm{n_{em,p}}
Electric motor speed - Port
[
rpm
\mathrm{rpm}
]
p
em
,
s
\mathrm{p_{em,s}}
Electric motor power - Starboard
[
kW
\mathrm{kW}
]
p
em
,
p
\mathrm{p_{em,p}}
Electric motor power - Port
[
kW
\mathrm{kW}
]
p
bat
,
s
\mathrm{p_{bat,s}}
Battery power - Starboard
[
kW
\mathrm{kW}
]
p
bat
,
p
\mathrm{p_{bat,p}}
Battery power - Port
[
kW
\mathrm{kW}
]
ξ
s
\mathrm{\xi_{s}}
State of charge - Starboard
[%]
ξ
p
\mathrm{\xi_{p}}
State of charge - Port
[%]
n
de
,
s
\mathrm{n_{de,s}}
Diesel engine speed - Starboard
[
rpm
\mathrm{rpm}
]
n
de
,
p
\mathrm{n_{de,p}}
Diesel engine speed - Port
[
rpm
\mathrm{rpm}
]
n
aux
\mathrm{n_{aux}}
Auxiliary generator set speed
[
rpm
\mathrm{rpm}
]
m
˙
de
,
s
\mathrm{\dot{m}_{de,s}}
Diesel fuel consumption - Starboard
[
kg
/
min
\mathrm{kg/min}
]
m
˙
de
,
p
\mathrm{\dot{m}_{de,p}}
Diesel fuel consumption - Port
[
kg
/
min
\mathrm{kg/min}
]
m
˙
aux
\mathrm{\dot{m}_{aux}}
Auxiliary generator set fuel consumption
[
kg
/
min
\mathrm{kg/min}
]
γ
de
,
s
\mathrm{\gamma_{de,s}}
Diesel engine load - Starboard
[%]
γ
de
,
p
\mathrm{\gamma_{de,p}}
Diesel engine load - Port
[%]
γ
aux
\mathrm{\gamma_{aux}}
Auxiliary generator set load
[%]
δ
s
\mathrm{\delta_{s}}
Steering angle - Starboard
[
∘
]
δ
p
\mathrm{\delta_{p}}
Steering angle - Port
[
∘
]
p
tot
\mathrm{p_{tot}}
Total Power
[
kW
\mathrm{kW}
]
In this work, the vessel has been retrofitted as described in Section
2.2
, and, as a result, only the information provided in Table
7
is available.
Specifically, we assume that the retrofit to a fully electric configuration does not alter the vessel’s operational profile.
Consequently, parameters such as
v
\mathrm{v}
,
δ
p
\mathrm{\delta_{p}}
,
δ
s
\mathrm{\delta_{s}}
, and
p
tot
\mathrm{p_{tot}}
are assumed to remain unchanged.
Table 7
:
Load forecasting: available data after the vessel retrofitting.
Symbol
Definition
Unit
v
\mathrm{v}
Vessel Speed
[
knots
\mathrm{knots}
]
n
prop
,
s
\mathrm{n_{prop,s}}
Propeller speed - Starboard
[
rpm
\mathrm{rpm}
]
n
prop
,
p
\mathrm{n_{prop,p}}
Propeller speed - Port
[
rpm
\mathrm{rpm}
]
δ
s
\mathrm{\delta_{s}}
Steering angle - Starboard
[
∘
]
δ
p
\mathrm{\delta_{p}}
Steering angle - Port
[
∘
]
p
tot
\mathrm{p_{tot}}
Total Power
[
kW
\mathrm{kW}
]
As a consequence, after the retrofitting, our scope is to predict, at time
t
0
t_{0}
, the
p
tot
\mathrm{p_{tot}}
for the next
Δ
+
\Delta^{+}
minutes with a sampling frequency of
5
s
5\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
, i.e.,
p
tot
​
(
t
)
\mathrm{p_{tot}}(t)
with
t
∈
{
t
0
+
5
​
s
,
t
0
+
10
​
s
,
⋯
,
t
0
+
Δ
+
}
t\in\{t_{0}+5s,t_{0}+10s,\cdots,t_{0}+\Delta^{+}\}
, based on the information of
v
\mathrm{v}
,
n
prop
,
s
\mathrm{n_{prop,s}}
,
n
prop
,
p
\mathrm{n_{prop,p}}
,
δ
p
\mathrm{\delta_{p}}
,
δ
s
\mathrm{\delta_{s}}
, and
p
tot
\mathrm{p_{tot}}
with
t
∈
[
t
0
−
Δ
−
,
t
0
]
t\in[t_{0}-\Delta^{-},t_{0}]
and
Δ
−
\Delta^{-}
(see Section
4.2
).
Table
8
summarizes inputs and output of our TSF problem.
Table 8
:
Load forecasting: input and output of the forecast problem available at time
t
0
t_{0}
.
Input/Output
Symbol
Frequency
Time Span
Input
v
\mathrm{v}
5
s
5\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
[
t
0
−
Δ
−
,
t
0
]
[t_{0}-\Delta^{-},t_{0}]
n
prop
,
s
\mathrm{n_{prop,s}}
n
prop
,
p
\mathrm{n_{prop,p}}
δ
s
\mathrm{\delta_{s}}
δ
p
\mathrm{\delta_{p}}
Output
p
tot
\mathrm{p_{tot}}
5
s
5\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
[
t
0
,
t
0
+
Δ
+
]
[t_{0},t_{0}+\Delta^{+}]
4.2
Methods
Table 9
:
Load Forecasting: MAE, MAPE, and PPMCC for XGBoost, TCN, TSFM, and XGBoost+TSFM for different time horizons.
MAE
Model
5s
1min
15min
30min
XGBoost
0.23
±
0.02
0.23{\pm}0.02
0.23
±
0.02
0.23{\pm}0.02
2.31
±
0.25
2.31{\pm}0.25
28.74
±
3.26
28.74{\pm}3.26
TCN
0.22
±
0.02
0.22{\pm}0.02
0.25
±
0.03
0.25{\pm}0.03
2.35
±
0.14
2.35{\pm}0.14
30.74
±
2.76
30.74{\pm}2.76
TSFM
0.41
±
0.04
0.41{\pm}0.04
0.43
±
0.05
0.43{\pm}0.05
2.85
±
0.23
2.85{\pm}0.23
51.94
±
5.01
51.94{\pm}5.01
XGBoost+TSFM
0.17
±
0.02
0.17{\pm}0.02
0.18
±
0.02
0.18{\pm}0.02
1.19
±
0.06
1.19{\pm}0.06
21.64
±
2.36
21.64{\pm}2.36
MAPE
XGBoost
1.2
±
0.1
1.2{\pm}0.1
1.6
±
0.1
1.6{\pm}0.1
4.4
±
0.5
4.4{\pm}0.5
58.0
±
5.9
58.0{\pm}5.9
TCN
1.2
±
0.1
1.2{\pm}0.1
1.7
±
0.2
1.7{\pm}0.2
4.4
±
0.5
4.4{\pm}0.5
61.0
±
7.1
61.0{\pm}7.1
TSFM
10.1
±
0.6
10.1{\pm}0.6
11.0
±
1.4
11.0{\pm}1.4
37.0
±
3.2
37.0{\pm}3.2
97.0
±
7.4
97.0{\pm}7.4
XGBoost+TSFM
0.4
±
0.1
0.4{\pm}0.1
0.4
±
0.1
0.4{\pm}0.1
2.8
±
0.3
2.8{\pm}0.3
51.0
±
5.9
51.0{\pm}5.9
PPMCC
XGBoost
0.998
±
0.012
0.998{\pm}0.012
0.997
±
0.011
0.997{\pm}0.011
0.926
±
0.011
0.926{\pm}0.011
0.127
±
0.001
0.127{\pm}0.001
TCN
0.999
±
0.008
0.999{\pm}0.008
0.998
±
0.009
0.998{\pm}0.009
0.928
±
0.010
0.928{\pm}0.010
0.129
±
0.001
0.129{\pm}0.001
TSFM
0.986
±
0.009
0.986{\pm}0.009
0.985
±
0.007
0.985{\pm}0.007
0.877
±
0.009
0.877{\pm}0.009
0.099
±
0.001
0.099{\pm}0.001
XGBoost+TSFM
0.997
±
0.009
0.997{\pm}0.009
0.998
±
0.013
0.998{\pm}0.013
0.938
±
0.008
0.938{\pm}0.008
0.139
±
0.001
0.139{\pm}0.001
The problem in Section
4.1
can be effectively framed as a classical TSF problem
Lim and Zohren
(
2021
);
Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David
(
2014
);
Bishop and Bishop
(
2023
)
.
TSF involves predicting future values of a variable of interest at time
t
0
t_{0}
, specifically for
t
∈
[
t
0
,
t
0
+
Δ
+
]
t\in[t_{0},t_{0}+\Delta^{+}]
.
The forecasting approach depends on the available information at time
t
0
t_{0}
.
Predictions can be made based solely on the past values of the target variable (i.e., without covariates).
Alternatively, forecasts can leverage both past values of the target variable and past and/or future values of related variables (i.e., with covariates).
Including relevant covariates can improve forecast accuracy by providing context and capturing variations not explained by the target variable alone.
In some scenarios, forecasts can be generated using only covariates if past values of the target variable are unavailable.
In our specific case, as shown in Table
8
, we have access to both past values of the target variable and past covariates.
As a first step, we tested a TSF method based on top-performing algorithms from different ML paradigms: Shallow ML (i.e., XGBoost
Chen and Guestrin
(
2016
)
), Deep ML (i.e., Temporal Convolutional Networks - TCN
Bai et al.
(
2018
)
), and TSFMs (i.e., the TSFM proposed in
Das et al.
(
2024
)
).
The first two approaches were implemented using the Dart library
Herzen et al.
(
2022
)
, while the last one was implemented using the library released by
Das et al.
(
2024
)
.
Each of the algorithms we have selected and listed is characterized by a set of hyperparameters that require tuning.
•
XGBoost
Chen and Guestrin
(
2016
)
requires tuning the learning rate
l
r
l_{r}
, the maximum tree depth
n
d
n_{d}
, the minimum loss reduction
m
l
m_{l}
, the number of training samples per tree
n
b
n_{b}
, and the number of features
n
f
n_{f}
randomly sampled at each node.
•
TCN is an implementation of a dilated temporal convolutional network for forecasting, inspired by
Bai et al.
(
2018
)
.
In this network, we tune the number of hidden layers
n
t
n_{t}
, the number of filters
f
i
f_{i}
and the kernel size
k
i
k_{i}
in each hidden layer, with
i
∈
{
1
,
…
,
n
h
}
i\in\{1,\dots,n_{h}\}
, as well as the dropout rate
d
r
,
i
d_{r,i}
of each hidden layer.
The model is trained using the ADAM optimizer
Kingma and Ba
(
2014
)
, tuning the learning rate
l
r
l_{r}
and the number of epochs
n
e
n_{e}
.
•
TSFM
Das et al.
(
2024
)
is a pretrained time-series foundation model developed by Google Research for time-series forecasting.
We fine-tune it using the ADAM optimizer
Kingma and Ba
(
2014
)
, tuning the learning rate
l
r
l_{r}
and the number of epochs
n
e
n_{e}
.
The summary of these hyperparameters with the associated search space is reported in Table
10
.
Table 10
:
Hyperparameters and hyperparameters search space for all algorithms tested in this work.
Algorithm
Hyperparameters
XGBoost
l
r
:
{
0.1
,
0.05
,
0.01
,
0.005
,
0.001
}
l_{r}:\{0.1,0.05,0.01,0.005,0.001\}
,
n
d
:
{
3
,
5
,
10
}
n_{d}:\{3,5,10\}
,
m
l
:
{
0
,
0.1
,
0.2
}
m_{l}:\{0,0.1,0.2\}
,
n
b
:
{
0.6
​
n
,
0.8
​
n
,
1
​
n
}
n_{b}:\{0.6n,0.8n,1n\}
,
n
f
:
{
0.5
​
d
,
0.8
​
d
,
1
​
d
}
n_{f}:\{0.5d,0.8d,1d\}
TCN
n
t
:
{
1
,
2
,
4
,
8
}
n_{t}:\{1,2,4,8\}
,
f
i
:
{
4
,
8
,
16
,
32
}
f_{i}:\{4,8,16,32\}
,
k
i
:
{
3
,
5
,
7
}
k_{i}:\{3,5,7\}
,
d
r
,
i
:
{
0.001
,
0.002
,
0.01
,
0.02
,
0.1
,
0.2
}
d_{r,i}:\{0.001,0.002,0.01,0.02,0.1,0.2\}
,
l
r
:
{
0.1
,
0.05
,
0.01
,
0.005
,
0.001
}
l_{r}:\{0.1,0.05,0.01,0.005,0.001\}
,
n
e
:
{
1
,
⋯
,
10
4
}
n_{e}:\{1,\cdots,10^{4}\}
TSFM
l
r
:
{
0.1
,
0.05
,
0.01
,
0.005
,
0.001
}
l_{r}:\{0.1,0.05,0.01,0.005,0.001\}
,
n
e
:
{
1
,
⋯
,
10
4
}
n_{e}:\{1,\cdots,10^{4}\}
-
Δ
−
:
{
5
,
10
,
30
,
60
,
350
,
600
,
1800
}
\Delta^{-}:\{5,10,30,60,350,600,1800\}
sec
Algorithms hyperparameter tuning (tougher with
Δ
−
\Delta^{-}
) and performance evaluation, i.e., model selection and error estimation
Oneto
(
2020
)
, were conducted using the standard temporal split of the train (60%), validation (20%), and test (20%) sets commonly applied in TSF
Herzen et al.
(
2022
);
Hyndman
(
2018
);
Lim and Zohren
(
2021
)
.
The training set is used to train the model, while the validation set is used to identify the optimal combination of hyperparameters.
Then, the training and validation sets are combined to train a final model using the best hyperparameter configuration, and its accuracy is evaluated on the test set, which is a fresh set of future data that has remained untouched throughout the process.
The accuracy is evaluated using a combination of quantitative and qualitative metrics.
The quantitative metrics include the Mean Absolute Error (MAE), the Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE), and the Pearson Product-Moment Correlation Coefficient (PPMCC)
Naser and Alavi
(
2023
)
.
The qualitative metrics comprise a scatter plot comparing actual versus predicted values
Sainani
(
2016
)
, as well as an analysis of the real-time series behavior against the forecast generated by the best-performing model.
From the results of these models (Section
4.3
), we observe that TSF methods based on XGBoost and TCN outperformed the TSFM-based approach, with XGBoost slightly surpassing TCN.
Nevertheless, given the specific nature of our TSF problem, TSFM showed impressive performance.
Consequently, we propose using the TSFM-based forecast as a future covariate for the XGBoost-based TSF method.
This integration (see Section
4.3
) leads to a notable performance improvement in the XGBoost-based TSF, confirming the potential of TSFM in real-world TSF applications.
As a final remark, note that we set
Δ
+
=
15
min
\Delta^{+}=$15\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}$
as, after that, the performance started to become too low to be used in practice.
4.3
Application to Case Study
Figure 12
:
MAE varying the time horizon for XGBoost+TSFM.
Figure 13
:
MAPE varying the time horizon for XGBoost+TSFM.
In this section we will present the results of applying the method presented in Section
4.2
to the problem and data described in Section
4.1
.
As a first step, we report in Table
9
the MAE, MAPE, and PPMCC for XGBoost, TCN, TSFM, and the combination of XGBoost and TSFM for different time horizons.
It is further possible to observe that XGBoost is the best-performing method among the base methods (XGBoost, TCN, and TSFM).
Nevertheless, XGBoost+TSFM resulted in an improvement over the base methods.
From Table
9
, we also note that on the
30
min
30\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
time horizon, the prediction starts to lose accuracy and therefore meaning.
The increase of MAE and MAPE for an increased time horizon with XGBoost+TSFM is shown in Figs.
12
and
13
, respectively.
To understand what time horizon can be considered meaningful, Figs.
12
and
13
show the dependency of MAE and MAPE on the time horizon for XGBoost+TSFM (best model according to Table
9
).
Figs.
12
and
13
indicate that
15
min
15\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
(
900
s
900\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
) is the limit to have a reasonable error (around
10
kW
10\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}
and
5
%
5\text{\,}\%
).
For the sake of completeness we report in Fig.
14
scatter plots and Fig.
15
the real versus predicted load for time horizons of
5
s
5\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
,
1
min
1\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
and
15
min
15\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
with XGBoost+TSFM prediction (best performing model according to Table
9
).
From Figs.
14
and
15
it is possible to observe also qualitatively the very good agreement between the real values and the XGBoost+TSFM predictions on the considered time horizon.
(a)
5 s
(b)
1 min
(c)
15 min
Figure 14
:
Load Forecasting: Scatter Plot and histogram of the absolute error for time horizons of a)
5
s
5\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
(a), b)
1
min
1\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
, and c)
15
min
15\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
for XGBoost+TSFM (best model according to Table
9
).
(a)
5 s
(b)
1 min
(c)
15 min
Figure 15
:
Load Forecasting: real load (blue) and predicted one (red) with XGBoost+TSFM prediction (the best model according to Table
9
) for time horizons of a)
5
s
5\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
(a), b)
1
min
1\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
, and c)
15
min
15\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
at different regimes (left low load and right medium/high load).
5
Power System Control
This chapter describes the energy management strategies which are used in this work to minimize the operating costs accounting for hydrogen consumption and cell degradation mechanisms.
The controlled system and centralized control architecture in this study is depicted in Fig.
17
.
First, a filter-based controller is introduced against which the optimization-based strategies are benchmarked.
Next, a minimization problem accounting for the steady-state operating costs and the state-space model from chapter
3
is constructed.
Finally,
ECMS
-based approach is expanded to the predictive
EMS
which leverages the data-driven load forecasting from chapter
4
and explicitly considers the dynamic costs and constraints of the system.
5.1
Filter-based Control
A virtual impedance-based controller for scalable
FC
-battery systems with DC distribution was presented in
Kopka et al.
(
2023b
)
and (JMET(submitted)).
These works realized a filter-based power split between the power generation and energy storage modules, with additional control outputs for voltage restoration and
SoC
management.
The filter-based power split and
SoC
management functionalities are implemented here as a benchmark control strategy.
The
FC
’s output power is determined based on the measured load power filtered through a low-pass filter such that
p
f
​
c
=
τ
f
​
d
s
+
τ
f
​
d
​
p
l
​
o
​
a
​
d
+
f
​
(
ξ
b
​
a
​
t
)
p_{fc}=\frac{\tau_{fd}}{s+\tau_{fd}}p_{load}+f(\xi_{bat})
(15)
where
τ
f
​
d
\tau_{fd}
is the tunable frequency decoupling time constant. Superimposed on the frequency decoupling is an
SoC
management strategy as laid out in
Kopka et al.
(
2023b
)
.
Figure 16
:
Equivalent cost of stored energy as a function of battery SoC versus marginal static cost of FC energy at BOL.
5.2
ECMS
To determine an instantaneously optimal split between the
FC
and stored energy in the battery, a cost function needs to be defined.
Originally, the ECMS approach assigns an equivalent fuel consumption to the energy stored in the battery
Sciarretta and Guzzella
(
2007
)
.
Here, we instead define an equivalent cost, which allows to incorporate both the hydrogen consumption as well as the FC degradation, thus making this approach health-aware.
The power-dependent cost of the
FC
was already defined in Sections
3.4
,
3.5
, and
3.6
.
The energy stored in the battery is assigned the equivalent cost
λ
\lambda
.
The optimal power split at a given time instance and load power is then defined by the
FC
power output minimizing the cost function
min
p
˙
f
​
c
⁡
f
f
​
c
,
s
​
t
​
a
​
t
​
(
p
f
​
c
)
+
λ
​
(
p
b
​
a
​
t
+
(
p
b
​
a
​
t
E
o
​
c
)
2
​
R
b
​
a
​
t
,
i
)
+
μ
​
p
˙
f
​
c
2
\min_{\dot{p}_{fc}}f_{fc,stat}\left(p_{fc}\right)+\lambda\left(p_{bat}+\left(\frac{p_{bat}}{E_{oc}}\right)^{2}R_{bat,i}\right)+\mu\dot{p}_{fc}^{2}
(16)
accounting for the system dynamics (
10
) and constraints (
2
,
3
,
4
).
To avoid high
FC
power gradients and unstable dynamic behavior of the controller, an arbitrary dynamic cost
μ
\mu
is added to the optimization.
5.2.1
Equivalent Cost of Stored Energy
A further challenge for the ECMS algorithm lies in the limited energy that can be stored in the batteries.
Accordingly, an additional
SoC
management strategy is required to avoid the violation of charge limits.
This can be realized by adjusting the equivalent cost
λ
\lambda
based on the
SoC
, such that
ESS
power is expensive at low and cheap at high charge.
Neglecting the dynamic cost
μ
\mu
and battery losses, the optimal power split for (
16
) lies in the intersection of the marginal cost of the
FC
d
​
f
f
​
c
,
s
​
t
​
a
​
t
​
(
p
f
​
c
)
d
​
p
f
​
c
\frac{df_{fc,stat}(p_{fc})}{dp_{fc}}
with
λ
\lambda
.
Via an appropriate choice of
λ
​
(
ξ
)
\lambda(\xi)
, we want to ensure that the
FC
power is maximal at the minimum allows charge
ξ
m
​
i
​
n
\xi_{min}
, and zero at
ξ
m
​
a
​
x
\xi_{max}
.
Additionally, at a reference
SoC
-level
ξ
r
​
e
​
f
\xi_{ref}
, the corresponding value of
λ
​
(
ξ
)
\lambda(\xi)
shall be equal to the marginal
FC
cost at a reference power level
P
f
​
c
,
r
​
e
​
f
P_{fc,ref}
.
The function
λ
​
(
ξ
)
\lambda(\xi)
is therefore defined by the third-order polynomial displayed in Fig.
16
where
λ
​
(
ξ
r
​
e
​
f
)
=
d
​
f
f
​
c
,
s
​
t
​
a
​
t
​
(
P
f
​
c
,
r
​
e
​
f
)
d
​
p
f
​
c
\lambda(\xi_{ref})=\frac{df_{fc,stat}(P_{fc,ref})}{dp_{fc}}
(17)
λ
​
(
ξ
m
​
i
​
n
)
=
d
​
f
f
​
c
,
s
​
t
​
a
​
t
​
(
P
f
​
c
,
m
​
a
​
x
)
d
​
p
f
​
c
\lambda(\xi_{min})=\frac{df_{fc,stat}(P_{fc,max})}{dp_{fc}}
(18)
λ
​
(
ξ
m
​
a
​
x
)
=
d
​
f
f
​
c
,
s
​
t
​
a
​
t
​
(
0
)
d
​
p
f
​
c
\lambda(\xi_{max})=\frac{df_{fc,stat}(0)}{dp_{fc}}
(19)
λ
​
(
ξ
r
​
e
​
f
)
d
​
ξ
=
0
\frac{\lambda(\xi_{ref})}{d\xi}=0
(20)
5.2.2
Dynamic Costs
The dynamic cost
μ
\mu
in (
16
) is intended to limit the magnitude of system inputs and avoid oscillations around an equilibrium point.
Further, it is an implicit means to incorporate the cost of dynamic load changes.
The formulation of the cost is similar to the dynamic cost in
12
.
However,
μ
\mu
must be considerably smaller than
d
​
v
d
​
y
​
n
​
2
dv_{dyn2}
, otherwise the full cost of the load change would outweigh the static components in (
16
), which only consider one time instant, yielding a sluggish controller.
5.3
MPC
Whereas the previous ECMS controller implements an instantaneous optimization, an MPC incorporates future inputs, states and disturbances as well.
This section describes the formulation of the MPC for the energy management of the FC-hybrid vessel.
Figure 17
:
Depiction of the plant model and the control architecture for filter-based EMS, ECMS, and MPC including load predictions
5.3.1
Optimization Problem
Given a prediction horizon
N
m
​
p
​
c
N_{mpc}
, an optimization time period of
T
m
​
p
​
c
T_{mpc}
, the optimal input
p
˙
f
​
c
∗
​
(
k
)
\dot{p}_{fc}^{*}(k)
at time instance
k
k
solves the optimization problem
min
p
˙
f
​
c
∑
n
=
k
k
+
N
m
​
p
​
c
−
1
T
m
​
p
​
c
(
(
f
f
​
c
,
s
​
t
​
a
​
t
(
p
f
​
c
(
n
)
)
+
d
V
˙
d
​
y
​
n
(
p
˙
f
​
c
(
n
)
)
+
λ
(
ξ
(
k
)
)
R
i
,
b
​
a
​
t
(
p
b
​
a
​
t
​
(
n
)
E
o
​
c
)
2
)
−
λ
(
ξ
(
k
)
)
ξ
(
k
+
N
m
​
p
​
c
)
E
o
​
c
C
b
​
a
​
t
\min_{\dot{p}_{fc}}\sum_{n=k}^{k+N_{mpc}-1}T_{mpc}\biggl((f_{fc,stat}(p_{fc}(n))+d\dot{V}_{dyn}(\dot{p}_{fc}(n))+\lambda(\xi(k))R_{i,bat}\left(\frac{p_{bat}(n)}{E_{oc}}\right)^{2}\biggr)-\lambda(\xi(k))\xi(k+N_{mpc})E_{oc}C_{bat}
(21)
s.t. (
2
), (
3
), (
4
), and (
10
).
For each time step
n
n
, the static and dynamic costs of the
FC
, as well as an equivalent cost for battery losses are considered. Additionally, the equivalent value of stored energy at time
k
+
N
m
​
p
​
c
k+N_{mpc}
is implemented as a terminal cost.
To avoid complex non-linearities, the equivalent cost
λ
​
(
ξ
)
\lambda(\xi)
is evaluated for the
SoC
at time
k
k
rather than for each time instance, such that it is eliminated as a dependent variable.
Doing so leaves only quadratic and linear terms in the cost function and linear constraints.
Accordingly, this problem can be solved using quadratic programming. The optimization is run once per optimization time interval
T
m
​
p
​
c
T_{mpc}
.
6
Numerical Investigations
The described energy management strategies are implemented in a numerical simulation environment using MATLAB/Simulink. The settings for the simulation and the controllers are listed in Table
11
. Several scenarios are tested to highlight the functioning principles and the performance of the different strategies.
First, a rectangular load profile is applied to the system to highlight the working principles of the
ECMS
and
MPC
.
Next, results of an exemplary mission profile for all strategies are shown for demonstrating the behavior of the respective approaches in real conditions and subsequently, aggregated results over all available mission profile are described. Finally, the effect of a variation of the prediction and control horizon on the performance of the
MPC
is analyzed to estimate the expected benefit of obtaining accurate predictions over a longer horizon.
Table 11
:
Simulation Settings
Parameter
Description
Value
T
s
​
i
​
m
T_{sim}
Simulation step width
1
s
1\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
T
e
​
c
​
m
​
s
T_{ecms}
ECMS step width
5
s
5\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
T
m
​
p
​
c
T_{mpc}
MPC step width
30
s
30\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
N
m
​
p
​
c
N_{mpc}
Control horizon
30
30\text{\,}
μ
\mu
Dynamic cost in ECMS
0.01
​
d
​
t
d
​
y
​
n
​
d
​
v
d
​
y
​
n
P
f
​
c
,
m
​
a
​
x
2
0.01\frac{dt_{dyn}dv_{dyn}}{P_{fc,max}^{2}}
ξ
i
​
n
​
i
​
t
\xi_{init}
Initial SoC
50
%
50\text{\,}\%
6.1
Rectangular Load Profile
To highlight the functioning principles of the respective
EMS
implementations, a simple rectangular-shaped load is fed into the system. For this, we emulate a mission sequence from sailing to towing to sailing. From the load histogram in Fig.
2
, we derive a power of
1300
kW
1300\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}
during sailing and
3800
kW
3800\text{\,}\mathrm{k}\mathrm{W}
during towing. We consider a shortened duration of towing of
10
min
10\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
, such that it falls within the prediction horizon and we assume a perfect power load prediction for this case.
The resulting power trajectories for the ECMS and
MPC
with
15
min
15\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
prediction horizon are displayed in Figs.
18
and
19
, respectively. The plots show both the full
EMS
implementations as well as a case in which the equivalent cost is not adapted to the battery
SoC
. For the
MPC
, an additional case is investigated in which the battery losses are ignored in the optimization problem.
Figure 18
:
Power trajectories of FC and battery with ECMS for rectangular load shape with (solid) and without (dashed) SoC adaptation of equivalent cost. Zoom-ins (yellow-backed) on details of battery and FC trajectories.
With
ECMS
it can clearly be seen that the controller is acting only upon a load change. At the load step, the batteries are immediately compensating the load imbalance, while the
FC
increases its power to establish a cost balance. The speed of this adaptation is subject to the dynamic cost
μ
\mu
. Without a cost factor adaptation, the system stays in an equilibrium as neither the
FC
cost nor the battery cost change. With cost adaptation active, the
FC
power is constantly increasing to compensate the increased cost of stored energy due to a decreasing
SoC
. Over an increased amount of time, the
FC
power would be required to match the load power, while the
SoC
approaches its lower limit. After the negative load step it can be observed that the
FC
power is higher than initially, due to the lower
SoC
. Without
SoC
adaptation, the trajectories are symmetrical.
Employing
MPC
, the controllers act already before the load step occurs, anticipating the power imbalance. The trajectory smoothly approaches an equilibrium, limiting the power gradients of the
FC
. As with the
ECMS
, the cost factor adaptation leads to an asymmetrical power trajectory accounting for the decreased battery
SoC
. Without cost adaptation and additionally neglecting battery losses, the
FC
power is completely constant, since the prediction horizon is longer than the pulse. This showcases the fact that in the first two scenarios, the increase in
FC
power output is done to avoid increased costs of battery losses.
Figure 19
:
Power trajectories of FC and battery with MPC for rectangular load shape with cost adaptation (solid), without cost adaptation (dashed), and without cost adaptation plus disregard of battery losses (dash-dot). Zoom-ins (yellow-backed) on details of battery and FC trajectories.
6.2
Mission Simulation
The application of the strategies is demonstrated with one exemplary mission profile. Figs.
20
,
21
, and
22
show the power trajectories during a mission phase with highly fluctuating loads. Fig.
23
shows the complete mission profile using
MPC
leveraging data-driven load predictions.
The comparison shows that both optimization-based approaches yield a flattened
FC
power output, with clearly reduced fluctuations and peak value.
The
MPC
further minimizes fluctuations compared to the
ECMS
-based controller such that fast fluctuations are almost entirely covered by the batteries.
Figure 20
:
Power split between FC and battery, and battery SoC during high fluctuations with filter-based control and
τ
f
​
d
=
600
s
\tau_{fd}=$600\text{\,}\mathrm{s}$
.
Figure 21
:
Power split between FC and battery, and battery SoC during high fluctuations with ECMS.
Figure 22
:
Power split between FC and battery, and battery SoC during high fluctuations with MPC and data-driven load prediction.
Figure 23
:
Power split between FC and battery, and battery SoC during mission simulation with MPC and data-driven load prediction.
To compare the performance of all strategies, the strategies are applied to all 167 available mission profiles, and their performance in terms of hydrogen consumption and
FC
degradation are compared, for
BOL
and
EOL
conditions.
In total, the missions add up to a total operation time of
345.1
h
345.1\text{\,}\mathrm{h}
. This time only accounts for active operation of the vessel and covers only the available measurements during the period described in Section
4.1
.
Fig.
24
shows a scatter plot indicating the results of all simulations at
BOL
for all described strategies, i.e. frequency decoupling with time constans of
τ
f
​
d
=
60
s
\tau_{fd}=$60\text{\,}\mathrm{s}$
,
τ
f
​
d
=
600
s
\tau_{fd}=$600\text{\,}\mathrm{s}$
,
ECMS
, and
MPC
with perfect and with data-driven load predictions. Fig.
25
shows the accumulated hydrogen consumption and degradation over all missions for these strategies.
The comparison of simulation outcomes clearly shows the decrease in both cell degradation and hydrogen consumption that is achieved by the proposed strategies.
At
BOL
, the benchmark controller with
τ
f
​
d
=
600
s
\tau_{fd}=$600\text{\,}\mathrm{s}$
yields
1422
μ
​
V
1422\text{\,}\mathrm{\mu}\mathrm{V}
cell degradation and
20.67
t
20.67\text{\,}\mathrm{t}
hydrogen consumption, which is already a clear improvement over the faster filter-based controller (
1838
μ
​
V
1838\text{\,}\mathrm{\mu}\mathrm{V}
;
20.84
t
20.84\text{\,}\mathrm{t}
).
However, the ECMS (
1041
μ
​
V
1041\text{\,}\mathrm{\mu}\mathrm{V}
;
20.27
t
20.27\text{\,}\mathrm{t}
) reduces these values by
26.8
%
26.8\text{\,}\%
and
1.9
%
1.9\text{\,}\%
, respectively.
The
MPC
implementations with perfect prediction (
946
μ
​
V
946\text{\,}\mathrm{\mu}\mathrm{V}
;
20.23
t
20.23\text{\,}\mathrm{t}
) and data-driven prediction (
945
μ
​
V
945\text{\,}\mathrm{\mu}\mathrm{V}
;
20.24
t
20.24\text{\,}\mathrm{t}
) yield nearly identical results which are
33.5
%
33.5\text{\,}\%
and
2.1
%
2.1\text{\,}\%
under the benchmark.
At
EOL
, it can be seen that the hydrogen consumption is generally higher. Whereas the filter-based approaches also show an increased degradation, the optimization-based approaches manage to limit or even reduce the latter.
The
MPC
, compared to the benchmark, reduces total degradation by
36.4
%
36.4\text{\,}\%
from
1460
μ
​
V
1460\text{\,}\mathrm{\mu}\mathrm{V}
to
928
μ
​
V
928\text{\,}\mathrm{\mu}\mathrm{V}
and hydrogen consumption by
5.8
%
5.8\text{\,}\%
from
22.35
t
22.35\text{\,}\mathrm{t}
to
21.05
t
21.05\text{\,}\mathrm{t}
.
The results show that the proposed
EMSs
have high potential for improving the system performance, especially for the
FC
durability.
Furthermore, the improvements become more significant when the
FC
’s degradation is already in an advanced stage.
Figure 24
:
Hydrogen consumption rate versus fuel cell degradation rate for filter-based, ECMS, and MPC strategies for all mission profiles at BOL.
Figure 25
:
Cumulative hydrogen consumption versus fuel cell degradation for filter-based, ECMS, and MPC strategies over all mission profiles.
6.3
Variation of Prediction Horizon
As evaluated in Section
6.2
, the results of
MPC
with data-driven load predictions are almost identical to those of
MPC
with assumed perfect predictions.
This underlines the applicability of data-driven load predictions in real-time applications.
In a next step, the effect of the prediction horizon on the control performance is analyzed.
Since data-driven predictions are currently only available over
15
min
15\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
, a comparison with a horizon of up to
60
min
60\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
is conducted assuming perfect predictions.
The results at
BOL
and
EOL
are shown in Fig.
26
, indicating a significant boost in with an increased prediction horizon.
At
BOL
with
15
min
15\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
prediction horizon, a cell degradation of
945
μ
​
V
945\text{\,}\mathrm{\mu}\mathrm{V}
and
20.24
t
20.24\text{\,}\mathrm{t}
hydrogen consumption can be realized.
An increased prediction horizon can decrease the degradation by up to
14.4
%
14.4\text{\,}\%
to
809
μ
​
V
809\text{\,}\mathrm{\mu}\mathrm{V}
and fuel use up to
3.6
%
3.6\text{\,}\%
to
19.52
t
19.52\text{\,}\mathrm{t}
with a
1
h
1\text{\,}\mathrm{h}
horizon.
At
EOL
the possible improvements are in a similar range with
14.0
%
14.0\text{\,}\%
and
3.8
%
3.8\text{\,}\%
, respectively.
The graph shows that especially the degradation can be significantly lowered by including longer forecasting periods.
A prediction over
15
min
15\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
has already been proven to be realistic in Section
4
, while an increased horizon significantly increases the prediction error (Fig.
13
).
This comparison shows the expected benefits arising from an increased accuracy over longer horizons, e.g., due to more data or additional insights.
Figure 26
:
Cumulative hydrogen consumption versus fuel cell degradation for MPC with perfect prediction for varying prediction horizon.
7
Conclusions
To increase the economic feasibility of
FC
-battery hybrid
SPS
, it is paramount to decrease its operating costs. A key factor in this is the design of the
EMS
, in which not only the hydrogen consumption but also the cell degradation, as a major contributor to the operating costs, must be considered.
Leveraging data-driven load forecasting, this work implemented a degradation-aware predictive energy management that aims at minimizing the total operating costs of a zero-emission harbor tug.
Using a degradation-aware equivalent cost approach for the instantaneous optimization of the energy management, a simultaneous decrease of both hydrogen consumption and cell degradation could be achieved compared to a filter-based benchmark.
The data-driven load prediction, given the available data time-series of the tugboat, showed a fairly accurate load prediction with a MAPE of
2.8
%
2.8\text{\,}\%
at
15
min
15\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
.
Leveraging this prediction, the degradation-aware predictive
EMS
yielded additional improvements in both fuel consumption as well as cell degradation over the
ECMS
-based method.
It was further shown that an accurate load prediction over even longer predictions horizons of up to an hour could yield additional, significant performance gains.
At an advanced aging state of the
FC
system towards its
EOL
, the relative difference in performance between the tested strategies increased, underscoring the potential benefits from the predictive strategy.
By utilizing real measurement data and limiting the inputs to those available in the virtually retrofitted zero-emission tugboat, this work proved the real-time applicability of the predictive energy management in actual systems. This is essential to realize the expected reductions in fuel consumption and cell degradation, thereby lowering the operational costs and contributing to the cost-competitiveness of zero-emission ships.
For future work it is intended to expand this approach to further ship types. Whereas this study assumes a central control of a single
FC
and battery, larger system require the coordination of multiple parallel generation and storage devices. This will require to account for different component ratings and capabilities, potentially needing alternative control architectures, e.g. in a distributed architecture. Furthermore, this work expanded the equivalent cost approach of the
ECMS
to its
MPC
framework, including a terminal cost for the battery
SoC
. As a next step, it will be interesting to determine whether a multi-horizon approach with an outer mission-scale optimization will allow for an improved performance by computing a target
SoC
and on-off state of
FC
systems for the inner
MPC
.
Whereas it seems that the minimization of both fuel consumption and cell degradation is favoring similar control strategies, i.e. steady operation within an efficient operation band, the inclusion of on-off switching of
FC
modules is expected to require a clearer trade-off between objectives.
Furthermore, this work did not explicitly assign costs to the efficiency decrease due to degradation, but this warrants further exploration. In addition, the fixed
10
%
10\text{\,}\%
performance drop for
EOL
definition of
FCs
is to be questioned for this application and instead be replaced by an optimization variable.
Acknowledgement(s)
This research is supported by the
Sustainable Hydrogen Integrated Propulsion Drives (SH2IPDRIVE)
project, which has received funding from RvO (reference number MOB21013), through the RDM regulation of the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
References
Adam et al. (2019)
Adam, S.P., Alexandropoulos, S.A.N.,
Pardalos, P.M., Vrahatis, M.N.,
2019.
No free lunch theorem: A review.
Approximation and optimization ,
57–82doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-12767-1_5
.
Antonopoulos et al. (2021)
Antonopoulos, S., Visser, K.,
Kalikatzarakis, M., Reppa, V.,
2021.
MPC Framework for the Energy Management of
Hybrid Ships with an Energy Storage System.
Journal of Marine Science and Engineering
9, 993.
doi:
10.3390/jmse9090993
.
Awais et al. (2023)
Awais, M., Naseer, M.,
Khan, S., Anwer, R.M.,
Others, 2023.
Foundational models defining a new era in vision: A
survey and outlook.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13721
doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2307.13721
.
Bai et al. (2018)
Bai, S., Kolter, J.Z.,
Koltun, V., 2018.
An empirical evaluation of generic convolutional and
recurrent networks for sequence modeling.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803. 01271
doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1803.01271
.
Balestra and
Schjølberg (2021a)
Balestra, L., Schjølberg, I.,
2021a.
Energy management strategies for a zero-emission
hybrid domestic ferry.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy
46, 38490–38503.
doi:
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2021.09.091
.
Balestra and
Schjølberg (2021b)
Balestra, L., Schjølberg, I.,
2021b.
Modelling and simulation of a zero-emission hybrid
power plant for a domestic ferry.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy
46, 10924–10938.
doi:
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.12.187
.
Banaei et al. (2020a)
Banaei, M., Boudjadar, J.,
Dragičević, T., Khooban, M.H.,
2020a.
Cost Effective Operation of a Hybrid
Zero-Emission Ferry Ship, in: 2020 IEEE 11th
International Symposium on Power Electronics for Distributed
Generation Systems (PEDG), Dubrovnik, Croatia. pp.
23–28.
doi:
10.1109/PEDG48541.2020.9244456
.
Banaei et al. (2021)
Banaei, M., Boudjadar, J.,
Khooban, M.H., 2021.
Stochastic Model Predictive Energy Management in
Hybrid Emission-Free Modern Maritime Vessels.
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics
17, 5430–5440.
doi:
10.1109/TII.2020.3027808
.
Banaei et al. (2020b)
Banaei, M., Rafiei, M.,
Boudjadar, J., Khooban, M.H.,
2020b.
A Comparative Analysis of Optimal Operation
Scenarios in Hybrid Emission-Free Ferry Ships.
IEEE Transactions on Transportation
Electrification 6, 318–333.
doi:
10.1109/TTE.2020.2970674
.
Bassam et al. (2016)
Bassam, A.M., Phillips, A.B.,
Turnock, S.R., Wilson, P.A.,
2016.
An improved energy management strategy for a hybrid
fuel cell/battery passenger vessel.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy
41, 22453–22464.
doi:
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.08.049
.
Bassam et al. (2017)
Bassam, A.M., Phillips, A.B.,
Turnock, S.R., Wilson, P.A.,
2017.
Development of a multi-scheme energy management
strategy for a hybrid fuel cell driven passenger ship.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy
42, 623–635.
doi:
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.08.209
.
Bishop and Bishop (2023)
Bishop, C.M., Bishop, H.,
2023.
Deep learning: Foundations and concepts.
Springer Nature.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45468-4
.
Chen et al. (2015)
Chen, H., Pei, P., Song,
M., 2015.
Lifetime prediction and the economic lifetime of
Proton Exchange Membrane fuel cells.
Applied Energy 142,
154–163.
doi:
10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.12.062
.
Chen and Guestrin (2016)
Chen, T., Guestrin, C.,
2016.
Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system, in:
acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge
discovery and data mining.
doi:
10.1145/2939672.2939785
.
Das et al. (2024)
Das, A., Kong, W., Sen,
R., Zhou, Y., 2024.
A decoder-only foundation model for time-series
forecasting, in: International Conference on Machine
Learning.
doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2310.10688
.
de Bruijn et al. (2008)
de Bruijn, F.A., Dam, V.a.T.,
Janssen, G.J.M., 2008.
Review: Durability and Degradation Issues of
PEM Fuel Cell Components.
Fuel Cells 8,
3–22.
doi:
10.1002/fuce.200700053
.
Fletcher et al. (2016)
Fletcher, T., Thring, R.,
Watkinson, M., 2016.
An Energy Management Strategy to concurrently
optimise fuel consumption & PEM fuel cell lifetime in a hybrid vehicle.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy
41, 21503–21515.
doi:
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.08.157
.
Geertsma et al. (2017)
Geertsma, R., Negenborn, R.,
Visser, K., Hopman, J.,
2017.
Design and control of hybrid power and propulsion
systems for smart ships: A review of developments.
Applied Energy 194,
30–54.
doi:
10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.02.060
.
Grimmelius (2011)
Grimmelius, H., 2011.
Control of Hybrid Ship Drive Systems.
Ph.D. thesis. TU Delft. Delft.
Gruver et al. (2024)
Gruver, N., Finzi, M.,
Qiu, S., Wilson, A.G.,
2024.
Large language models are zero-shot time series
forecasters.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2310.07820
.
Han et al. (2014)
Han, J., Charpentier, J.F.,
Tang, T., 2014.
An energy management system of a fuel cell/battery
hybrid boat.
Energies 7,
2799–2820.
doi:
10.3390/en7052799
.
Haseltalab and
Negenborn (2019)
Haseltalab, A., Negenborn, R.R.,
2019.
Model predictive maneuvering control and energy
management for all-electric autonomous ships.
Applied Energy 251,
113308.
doi:
10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113308
.
Herzen et al. (2022)
Herzen, J., Lässig, F.,
Piazzetta, S.G., Neuer, T.,
Others, 2022.
Darts: User-friendly modern machine learning for time
series.
Journal of Machine Learning Research
23, 1–6.
doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2110.03224
.
Hyndman (2018)
Hyndman, R.J., 2018.
Forecasting: principles and practice.
OTexts.
Jaurola et al. (2019)
Jaurola, M., Hedin, A.,
Tikkanen, S., Huhtala, K.,
2019.
Optimising design and power management in
energy-efficient marine vessel power systems: A literature review.
Journal of Marine Engineering & Technology
18, 92–101.
doi:
10.1080/20464177.2018.1505584
.
Jouin et al. (2016)
Jouin, M., Bressel, M.,
Morando, S., Gouriveau, R.,
Hissel, D., Péra, M.C.,
Zerhouni, N., Jemei, S.,
Hilairet, M., Ould Bouamama, B.,
2016.
Estimating the end-of-life of PEM fuel cells:
Guidelines and metrics.
Applied Energy 177,
87–97.
doi:
10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.05.076
.
Khazaei (2021)
Khazaei, J., 2021.
Optimal Flow of MVDC Shipboard Microgrids With
Hybrid Storage Enhanced With Capacitive and Resistive Droop
Controllers.
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems
36, 3728–3739.
doi:
10.1109/TPWRS.2021.3049343
.
Kingma and Ba (2014)
Kingma, D.P., Ba, J., 2014.
Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980
doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1412.6980
.
Kleen and Gibbons (2024)
Kleen, G., Gibbons, W.,
2024.
DOE Hydrogen Program Record: Heavy-Duty Fuel
Cell System Cost – 2023.
https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/docs/hydrogenprogramlibraries/pdfs/review24/24004-hd-fuel-cell-system-cost-2023.pdf.
Kopka et al. (2025)
Kopka, T., Andrea, C.,
Polinder, H., 2025.
Virtual impedance-based frequency decoupling for
modular fuel cell-battery DC shipboard power systems.
Journal of Marine Engineering & Technology ,
1–13doi:
10.1080/20464177.2025.2489313
.
Kopka et al. (2023a)
Kopka, T., Löffler, C.,
Coraddu, A., Polinder, H.,
2023a.
Hierarchical Control Strategy for Fuel
Cell-Battery Shipboard Power System Utilizing a Modular Control
Architecture, in: 2023 IEEE Transportation
Electrification Conference and Expo, Asia-Pacific (ITEC
Asia-Pacific), Chiang-Mai, Thailand.
doi:
10.1109/ITECAsia-Pacific59272.2023.10372342
.
Kopka et al. (2023b)
Kopka, T., Mylonopoulos, F.,
Coraddu, A., Polinder, H.,
2023b.
Decentralized Power Sharing with Frequency
Decoupling for a Fuel Cell-Battery DC Shipboard Power System, in:
Modelling and Optimisation of Ship Energy Systems
2023, Delft, Netherlands.
doi:
10.59490/moses.2023.670
.
Liang et al. (2024)
Liang, Y., Wen, H., Nie,
Y., Jiang, Y., Others,
2024.
Foundation models for time series analysis: A
tutorial and survey, in: ACM SIGKDD Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
doi:
arXiv.2403.14735
.
Lim and Zohren (2021)
Lim, B., Zohren, S., 2021.
Time-series forecasting with deep learning: a
survey.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A
379, 20200209.
doi:
10.1098/rsta.2020.0209
.
Mao et al. (2017)
Mao, L., Jackson, L.,
Jackson, T., 2017.
Investigation of polymer electrolyte membrane fuel
cell internal behaviour during long term operation and its use in
prognostics.
Journal of Power Sources 362,
39–49.
doi:
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2017.07.018
.
Meng et al. (2021)
Meng, K., Zhou, H., Chen,
B., Tu, Z., 2021.
Dynamic current cycles effect on the degradation
characteristic of a H2/O2 proton exchange membrane fuel cell.
Energy 224,
120168.
doi:
10.1016/j.energy.2021.120168
.
Mutarraf et al. (2018)
Mutarraf, M.U., Terriche, Y.,
Niazi, K.A.K., Vasquez, J.C.,
Guerrero, J.M., 2018.
Energy Storage Systems for Shipboard
Microgrids—A Review.
Energies ,
32doi:
10.3390/en11123492
.
Naser and Alavi (2023)
Naser, M.Z., Alavi, A.H.,
2023.
Error metrics and performance fitness indicators for
artificial intelligence and machine learning in engineering and sciences.
Architecture, Structures and Construction
3, 499–517.
doi:
10.1007/s44150-021-00015-8
.
Nedstack (2023)
Nedstack, 2023.
Nedstack | FCS 13-XXL.
https://nedstack.com/sites/default/files/2019-11/20191105_nedstack_fcs_13-xxl.pdf.
Njoya et al. (2009)
Njoya, S.N., Tremblay, O.,
Dessaint, L.A., 2009.
A generic fuel cell model for the simulation of fuel
cell vehicles, in: 2009 IEEE Vehicle Power and
Propulsion Conference, Dearborn, MI, USA. pp.
1722–1729.
doi:
10.1109/VPPC.2009.5289692
.
Nuchturee et al. (2020)
Nuchturee, C., Li, T.,
Xia, H., 2020.
Energy efficiency of integrated electric propulsion
for ships – A review.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
134, 110145.
doi:
10.1016/j.rser.2020.110145
.
Oneto (2020)
Oneto, L., 2020.
Model Selection and Error Estimation in a Nutshell.
Springer.
doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-24359-3
.
Oreshkin et al. (2019)
Oreshkin, B.N., Carpov, D.,
Chapados, N., Bengio, Y.,
2019.
N-beats: Neural basis expansion analysis for
interpretable time series forecasting.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10437
doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1905.10437
.
Paran et al. (2015)
Paran, S., Vu, T.V.,
Mezyani, T.E., Edrington, C.S.,
2015.
MPC-based power management in the shipboard power
system, in: 2015 IEEE Electric Ship Technologies
Symposium (ESTS), Old Town Alexandria, VA, USA. pp.
14–18.
doi:
10.1109/ESTS.2015.7157855
.
(45)
RS-PRO, .
Rechargeable Lithiumion Iron Phosphate Battery
(LiFePO4) - Datasheet.
https://docs.rs-online.com/f4c2/A700000009327850.pdf.
Sainani (2016)
Sainani, K.L., 2016.
The value of scatter plots.
PM&R 8,
1213–1217.
doi:
10.1016/j.pmrj.2016.10.018
.
Salinas et al. (2020)
Salinas, D., Flunkert, V.,
Gasthaus, J., Januschowski, T.,
2020.
Deepar: Probabilistic forecasting with autoregressive
recurrent networks.
International journal of forecasting
36, 1181–1191.
doi:
10.1016/j.ijforecast.2019.07.001
.
Sciarretta and Guzzella (2007)
Sciarretta, A., Guzzella, L.,
2007.
Control of hybrid electric vehicles.
IEEE Control Systems Magazine
27, 60–70.
doi:
10.1109/MCS.2007.338280
.
Seenumani et al. (2010)
Seenumani, G., Sun, J.,
Peng, H., 2010.
A hierarchical optimal control strategy for power
management of hybrid power systems in all electric ships applications, in:
49th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control
(CDC), Atlanta, GA, USA. pp.
3972–3977.
doi:
10.1109/CDC.2010.5717035
.
Shakeri et al. (2020)
Shakeri, N., Zadeh, M.,
Bremnes Nielsen, J., 2020.
Hydrogen Fuel Cells for Ship Electric
Propulsion: Moving Toward Greener Ships.
IEEE Electrification Magazine 8,
27–43.
doi:
10.1109/MELE.2020.2985484
.
Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David (2014)
Shalev-Shwartz, S., Ben-David, S.,
2014.
Understanding machine learning: From theory to
algorithms.
Cambridge university press.
doi:
10.1017/CBO9781107298019
.
Tremblay et al. (2007)
Tremblay, O., Dessaint, L.A.,
Dekkiche, A.I., 2007.
A Generic Battery Model for the Dynamic
Simulation of Hybrid Electric Vehicles, in: 2007
IEEE Vehicle Power and Propulsion Conference,
Arlington, TX, USA. pp. 284–289.
doi:
10.1109/VPPC.2007.4544139
.
Wallnöfer-Ogris et al. (2024)
Wallnöfer-Ogris, E., Poimer, F.,
Köll, R., Macherhammer, M.G.,
Trattner, A., 2024.
Main degradation mechanisms of polymer electrolyte
membrane fuel cell stacks – Mechanisms, influencing factors,
consequences, and mitigation strategies.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy
50, 1159–1182.
doi:
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2023.06.215
.
Xiang and Yang (2021)
Xiang, Y., Yang, X., 2021.
An ECMS for Multi-Objective Energy Management
Strategy of Parallel Diesel Electric Hybrid Ship Based on Ant Colony
Optimization Algorithm.
Energies 14,
810.
doi:
10.3390/en14040810
.
Xie et al. (2022)
Xie, P., Guerrero, J.M.,
Tan, S., Bazmohammadi, N.,
Vasquez, J.C., Mehrzadi, M.,
Al-Turki, Y., 2022.
Optimization-Based Power and Energy Management
System in Shipboard Microgrid: A Review.
IEEE Systems Journal 16,
578–590.
doi:
10.1109/JSYST.2020.3047673
.
Xie et al. (2021)
Xie, P., Tan, S.,
Guerrero, J.M., Vasquez, J.C.,
2021.
MPC-informed ECMS based real-time power
management strategy for hybrid electric ship.
Energy Reports 7,
126–133.
doi:
10.1016/j.egyr.2021.02.013
.
Yuan et al. (2016)
Yuan, L.C.W., Tjahjowidodo, T.,
Lee, G.S.G., Chan, R.,
Adnanes, A.K., 2016.
Equivalent Consumption Minimization Strategy for
hybrid all-electric tugboats to optimize fuel savings, in:
Proc Am Control Conf, Boston, MA,
USA. pp. 6803–6808.
doi:
10.1109/ACC.2016.7526743
.
Zhang et al. (2022)
Zhang, Y., Xue, Q., Gao,
D., Shi, W., Yu, W.,
2022.
Two-level model predictive control energy management
strategy for hybrid power ships with hybrid energy storage system.
Journal of Energy Storage 52,
104763.
doi:
10.1016/j.est.2022.104763
.
Zhang et al. (2020)
Zhang, Z., Guan, C., Liu,
Z., 2020.
Real-Time Optimization Energy Management Strategy
for Fuel Cell Hybrid Ships Considering Power Sources Degradation.
IEEE Access 8,
87046–87059.
doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2991519
.
Zhao et al. (2023)
Zhao, W.X., Zhou, K., Li,
J., Tang, T., Others,
2023.
A survey of large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223
doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2303.18223
.
Zhao (2022)
Zhao, Z.H., 2022.
Improved fuzzy logic control-based energy management
strategy for hybrid power system of FC/PV/battery/SC on tourist
ship.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy
47, 9719–9734.
doi:
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.01.040
.
Zhu et al. (2014)
Zhu, L., Han, J., Peng,
D., Wang, T., Tang, T.,
Charpentier, J.F., 2014.
Fuzzy logic based energy management strategy for a
fuel cell/battery/ultra-capacitor hybrid ship, in: 2014
First International Conference on Green Energy ICGE 2014,
Sfax, Tunisia. pp. 107–112.
doi:
10.1109/ICGE.2014.6835406
.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA