IDOBE: Infectious Disease Outbreak forecasting Benchmark Ecosystem
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract.
1
Introduction
1.1
Contributions
Data and code availability
1.2
Related Work
2
Methodology
2.1
Task definition
2.2
Benchmark data curation
2.2.1
Available datasets
2.2.2
Outbreak Segmentation
2.3
Analytical measures
Entropy analysis
Permutation Entropy analysis
Skewness and Kurtosis
2.4
Baseline methods
2.4.1
Model Training/Fitting and Testing
2.5
Forecast Evaluation Metrics
2.5.1
Point Forecasts
2.5.2
Probabilistic Forecasts
3
Results
3.1
Dataset characteristics
3.2
Analytical measures
3.3
Baseline performance
4
Discussion
5
Data and model availability
References
A
Disease- and Outcome-Specific Baseline Performance
License: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
arXiv:2604.18521v1 [cs.LG] 20 Apr 2026
IDOBE: Infectious Disease Outbreak forecasting Benchmark Ecosystem
Aniruddha Adiga
∗
,
Jingyuan Chou
,
Anshul Chiranth
,
Bryan Lewis
Biocomplexity Institute, University of Virginia
Charlottesville
Virginia
USA
*aa5dw@virginia.edu
,
Ana I. Bento
Department of Public and Ecosystem Health
Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine
Ithaca
New York
USA
,
Shaun Truelove
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore
Maryland
USA
,
Geoffrey Fox
,
Madhav Marathe
Biocomplexity Institute and Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
Charlottesville
Virginia
USA
,
Harry Hochheiser
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh
Pennsylvania
USA
and
Srini Venkatramanan
Biocomplexity Institute, University of Virginia
Charlottesville
Virginia
USA
srini@virginia.edu
Abstract.
Epidemic forecasting has become an integral part of real-time infectious disease outbreak response. While collaborative ensembles composed of statistical and machine learning models have become the norm for real-time forecasting, standardized benchmark datasets for evaluating such methods are lacking. Further, there is limited understanding on performance of these methods for novel outbreaks with limited historical data. In this paper, we propose IDOBE, a curated collection of epidemiological time series focused on outbreak forecasting. IDOBE compiles from multiple data repositories spanning over a century of surveillance and across U.S. states and global locations. We perform derivative-based segmentation to generate over 10,000 outbreaks covering multiple outcomes such as cases and hospitalizations for 13 diseases. We consider a variety of information-theoretic and distributional measures to quantify the epidemiological diversity of the dataset. Finally, we perform multi-horizon short-term forecasting (1- to 4-week-ahead) through the progression of the outbreak using 11 baseline models and report on their performance. In addition to standard metrics such as NMSE and MAPE for point forecasts, we include probabilistic scoring rules such as Normalized Weighted Interval Score (NWIS) to quantify the performance. We find that MLP-based methods have the most robust performance, with statistical methods having a slight edge during the pre-peak phase. IDOBE dataset along with baselines are released publicly on
https://github.com/NSSAC/IDOBE
to enable standardized, reproducible benchmarking of outbreak forecasting methods.
Forecasting, Benchmark, Epidemics, Timeseries, Machine Learning
1.
Introduction
In recent years, epidemic forecasting has emerged as an active subdomain of computational epidemiology. Short-term forecasts of infectious disease activity have been adopted by various sub-national, national, and international agencies to guide outbreak response
(Lutz
et al.
,
2019
)
. Agencies such as US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have established dedicated centers focused on improving the science, engineering, and translation of forecasting and outbreak analytics. Multi-model ensembles have been constituted to support both seasonal (e.g., Influenza)
(Mathis
et al.
,
2024
)
and pandemic (e.g., COVID-19)
(Cramer
et al.
,
2022
)
prediction efforts. Such efforts have been expanded to producing scenario-based projections to guide public health policy
(Borchering
et al.
,
2023
; Loo
et al.
,
2024
)
. Unlike projection models which mostly rely on mechanistic representations of underlying dynamics, forecast ensembles are constituted by a diverse collection of models
(Reich
et al.
,
2019
; Adiga
et al.
,
2021
)
including machine learning, statistical and mechanistic approaches, and take advantage of multiple data streams
(Adiga
et al.
,
2022a
)
including syndromic, clinical, and environmental surveillance
(López-Peñalver
et al.
,
2023
)
, as well as internet-based indicators. Through this partnership, robust infrastructure has been developed to undertake such Hub-style efforts for future outbreaks
(Shandross
et al.
,
2025
; Kerr
et al.
,
2025
; Bosse
et al.
,
2022
)
.
While significant strides have been made in advancing real-time epidemic forecasting, there is a lack of standardized, multi-disease benchmark datasets for performance evaluation of existing models and ensembles. This is especially challenging in the context of operationalizing such models for a novel outbreak
1
1
1
For our purposes, we will adopt CDC’s definition of outbreak as a period with more disease cases than expected for a given time, within a specific location, and for a target population
(
for Disease Control and Prevention,
)
.
either in a region with limited data availability (e.g., 2014-16 West African Ebola outbreak) or limited historical or seasonal data (e.g., COVID-19 in early 2020). While multiple real-time
(Biggerstaff
et al.
,
2016
; Cramer
et al.
,
2021
)
and retrospective
(Reich
et al.
,
2019
)
efforts have been undertaken, there is also need for standardized evaluation of methods outside the operational context. Most real-time efforts (outside COVID-19) have involved seasonal epidemics like Influenza, Dengue, and hence have leveraged the existence of historical data. Pre-trained epidemic models
(Kamarthi and Prakash,
2023
)
trained across various regional outbreaks will be needed for rapid deployment and wider adoption.
1.1.
Contributions
In this paper, we present IDOBE, an ecosystem for benchmarking models in the task of infectious disease outbreak forecasting. IDOBE comprises curated and preprocessed outbreaks drawn from diverse data repositories, along with a collection of baseline models and standardized evaluation metrics relevant for epidemic forecasting. Specifically:
•
We preprocess epidemic time series datasets for
13 different diseases
, across
248 unique locations
, and outcomes such as outpatient visits, confirmed cases and hospitalizations. The dataset comprising
10799 outbreaks
, is compiled from existing disease data repositories such as Tycho
(van Panhuis
et al.
,
2018
)
, JHU-CSSE COVID-19 data repository
(Dong
et al.
,
2020
)
, as well public health surveillance published by US CDC and the National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN).
•
We propose a suite of
information-theoretic
and
distributional measures
to characterize the diversity of outbreak trajectories contained in IDOBE. While some of these measures such as entropy
(Dalziel
et al.
,
2018
)
and permutation entropy
(Scarpino and Petri,
2019
)
have been used in isolated studies, such a multi-dimensional characterization has not been performed before in the context of epidemic outbreak trajectories.
•
We generate for multi-horizon short-term forecasting (1- to 4-week ahead) from
11 baseline models
across the progression of the outbreak. The baseline models span a variety of statistical (ARIMA, ETS), MLP-based (MLP, N-BEATS, N-HiTS), transformer-based (Informer,TFT), and RNN-based (RNN, GRU, LSTM, TCN) methods. In addition to producing point forecasts, the models are run with uncertainty quantification to produce probabilistic forecasts in the Hubverse
(Kerr
et al.
,
2025
)
standard format consistent with existing forecasting Hubs.
•
In addition to evaluating the point forecasts using standard metrics such as
MAPE, NMSE
, we also incorporate a
normalized
version of the
Weighted Interval Score (NWIS)
(Bracher
et al.
,
2020
)
for the probabilistic forecasts. We interpret the performance of baseline models across epidemiological context of the outbreak (pre-peak or post-peak) and forecast horizon as well as by disease.
Data and code availability
To ensure reproducibility and facilitate further exploration, we provide preprocessed datasets, trained baseline models, and scripts for extracting outbreak analytics and evaluation metrics through the public repository:
https://github.com/NSSAC/IDOBE
Figure 1
.
Timeseries corresponding to different diseases.
1.2.
Related Work
Collaborative forecasting “challenges” have been conducted for more than a decade under the Epidemic Prediction Initiative by US CDC, for targets ranging from seasonal influenza-like illness (ILI) forecasting (2013-now)
(Biggerstaff
et al.
,
2016
; Mathis
et al.
,
2024
)
, Dengue (2015)
(Johansson
et al.
,
2019
)
, Chikungunya (2014)
(Del Valle
et al.
,
2018
)
and West Nile Virus
(Holcomb
et al.
,
2023
)
. Of these, ILI forecasting has received the most attention, with retrospective forecast performance evaluation conducted as part of the FluSight Network
(Reich
et al.
,
2019
)
. Similar efforts during the COVID-19 pandemic
(Cramer
et al.
,
2021
,
2022
)
played a key role in influencing public policy, although model performance varied significantly across key epochs
(Rosenfeld and Tibshirani,
2021
; Lopez
et al.
,
2024
)
. While most of these efforts target seasonal, recurrent epidemics, IDOBE is designed around discrete outbreak episodes, mirroring novel or emerging pathogen scenarios.
Other efforts such as the M-competitions
(Makridakis and Hibon,
2000
; Makridakis
et al.
,
2020
,
2022
)
have been undertaken in the forecasting community outside epidemiology. Recently, benchmarks such GIFT-Eval
(Aksu
et al.
,
2024
)
have been developed for general time series forecasting tasks. Recently, Pre-trained
(Kamarthi and Prakash,
2023
)
and Foundation models
(Kalahasti
et al.
,
2025
)
have been developed and evaluated in the epidemiological context. A similar benchmarking framework to ours was envisioned in
(Srivastava
et al.
,
2021
)
, although it was limited to COVID-19 forecasting in the US with simpler evaluation metrics and did not tackle the broader task of outbreak forecasting as outlined in this paper.
2.
Methodology
2.1.
Task definition
Consider an outbreak of disease
d
d
reported at location
l
l
for a particular disease outcome
o
o
(cases, deaths, or hospitalizations). Let
i
i
be the unique identification number of the outbreak, and let
T
i
T_{i}
be the duration of the outbreak. We denote the time series corresponding to the outbreak
i
i
as a vector
x
z
(
0
:
T
i
)
=
[
x
z
(
0
)
,
x
z
(
1
)
,
⋯
,
x
z
(
T
i
)
]
\textbf{x}_{z}(0:T_{i})=[x_{z}(0),x_{z}(1),\cdots,x_{z}(T_{i})]
, where
x
z
​
(
⋅
)
x_{z}(\cdot)
is the value of the outcome and
z
=
(
d
,
l
,
o
,
i
)
z=(d,l,o,i)
. In this work, we focus on simulating the task of short-term forecasting of outbreaks in real-time. Thus, given observations up to
u
u
, denoted as
x
z
(
0
:
u
)
\textbf{x}_{z}(0:u)
, the goal is to forecast the values
x
z
(
u
+
1
:
u
+
h
)
\textbf{x}_{z}(u+1:u+h)
, where
h
h
is the forecast horizon. In epidemic forecasting, similar to weather forecasting
(Gneiting
et al.
,
2007
)
, predictive probability distribution of future values is the standardized format for reporting forecasts. Hence, the real-time forecasting task would involve learning a model
f
Θ
(
k
)
:
x
z
(
0
:
u
)
→
P
(
x
z
(
u
+
k
)
|
x
z
(
0
:
u
)
,
Θ
)
f_{\Theta}(k):\textbf{x}_{z}(0:u)\rightarrow P(x_{z}(u+k)|\textbf{x}_{z}(0:u),\Theta)
, for
0
≤
u
≤
T
i
0\leq u\leq T_{i}
,
0
≤
k
≤
h
0\leq k\leq h
.
The model parameters
Θ
\Theta
are typically learned from historically observed outbreaks. Typically, historical data consists of multiple outbreaks. In the subsequent sections, we discuss the process of extracting individual outbreaks from the complete time series.
2.2.
Benchmark data curation
Table 1.
Statistics of source datasets and outbreaks across different diseases
disease
event
# outbreaks
start date
end date
# years
CHICKENPOX [VARICELLA]
CASES
25
1972-02-19
1982-08-07
10
COVID-19
CASES
981
2020-03-21
2025-05-10
5
COVID-19
HOSPITALIZATIONS
473
2020-07-18
2025-05-31
5
DIPHTHERIA
CASES
1062
1927-12-03
1978-11-18
51
ILI
PERCENT UNWEIGHTED
867
2010-09-11
2025-05-31
15
INFLUENZA
HOSPITALIZATIONS
337
2020-10-24
2025-05-31
5
MEASLES
CASES
1517
1927-12-24
1997-05-17
69
POLIOMYELITIS
CASES
2442
1921-12-31
1971-08-21
50
RSV
HOSPITALIZATIONS
55
2023-11-11
2025-05-31
2
RUBELLA
CASES
84
1966-10-01
1997-03-08
30
SCARLET FEVER
CASES
1333
1927-11-05
1967-02-04
39
SMALLPOX
CASES
1324
1910-08-06
1949-05-07
39
TYPHOID FEVER [ENTERIC FEVER]
CASES
48
1928-04-21
1963-06-29
35
WHOOPING COUGH [PERTUSSIS]
CASES
251
1937-03-20
2015-05-09
78
Figure 2
.
Example segmentation of timeseries into individual outbreaks (pink vertical dashed lines indicate the cutpoints).
2.2.1.
Available datasets
We collect disease-specific data from four different sources: Tycho
(van Panhuis
et al.
,
2018
)
, JHU-CSSE
(Dong
et al.
,
2020
)
, US CDC, and NHSN. Each data source has data collected over different timelines, cover different diseases, temporal resolution (daily or weekly), and locations and the data format and nomenclature used also vary. Daily counts (only available for COVID-19 cases) are often dominated by reporting noise and day-of-the-week effects and can be smoothed out by aggregating daily data to weekly resolution. Moreover, many epidemic forecasting efforts require weekly forecasts
(Mathis
et al.
,
2024
; Cramer
et al.
,
2021
)
. Accordingly, we align the temporal resolution across all datasets to be weekly, indexed by the MMWR week (Sunday-Saturday). Since COVID-19 confirmed cases are reported as daily counts, weekly count was obtained by summing the reported counts from Sunday-Saturday.
The Tycho dataset
(van Panhuis
et al.
,
2018
)
contains weekly reports of 56 infectious diseases collected between 1888 and 2014 across various U.S. cities, counties, and states. However, no single disease was reported continuously throughout the entire interval. Among the Tycho time series, many contain substantial missing data. In order balance retention of long historical series with the need for sufficient observed data for model training, we exclude timeseries with significant proportion of missing values and no prominent outbreak segments. For the remaining timeseries, missing values are imputed using linear interpolation. After filtering, nine diseases from the Tycho dataset were retained.
The Johns Hopkins University (JHU) COVID-19 data repository
(Dong
et al.
,
2020
)
provides time series of reported COVID-19 cases globally, as well as across U.S. states and counties. At the global level, we include 201 locations, comprising countries and a few special administrative regions or events. At the U.S. level, we focus on all 50 states. Although the JHU dataset includes county-level data, it is often sparse and noisy due to low case counts; thus, we exclude it in this version. We plan to incorporate county-level data in a future release. We obtained the percentage of outpatient Influenza-Like Illness (ILI) visits data from CDC at the state level for United States, spanning fifteen seasons from 2010 to 2025
2
2
2
https://gis.cdc.gov/grasp/fluview/fluportaldashboard.html
. The National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN) dataset
3
3
3
https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/psc/hospital-respiratory-dashboard.html
includes weekly records of new hospital admissions due to COVID-19, Influenza, and RSV across the 50 states of U.S. In total, we compile time series data for 13 diseases across the four data sources. The timeseries corresponding to different diseases are shown in Figure
1
.
2.2.2.
Outbreak Segmentation
Disease surveillance corresponding to every disease
d
d
, location
l
l
, outcome
o
o
consist of multiple outbreaks. We denote the historical reports as
X
d
,
l
o
​
(
t
)
X_{d,l}^{o}(t)
. In the benchmark dataset, we extract the individual outbreaks from each
X
d
,
l
o
​
(
t
)
X_{d,l}^{o}(t)
using a segmentation function
S
ϕ
:
X
d
,
l
o
(
t
)
→
{
x
d
,
l
,
o
(
t
n
:
t
n
+
T
n
)
}
n
=
0
N
−
1
S_{\phi}:X_{d,l}^{o}(t)\rightarrow\{x_{d,l,o}(t_{n}:t_{n}+T_{n})\}_{n=0}^{N-1}
. Each individual outbreak is assigned a unique identifier
i
i
and stored in a dictionary
𝒳
=
{
x
z
}
z
∈
Z
\mathcal{X}=\{\textbf{x}_{z}\}_{z\in Z}
, where
z
=
(
d
,
l
,
o
,
i
)
z=(d,l,o,i)
and
Z
Z
is the set of all tuples.
We employ a derivative-based function as
S
ϕ
S_{\phi}
to obtain individual outbreaks. We use a Python toolbox EpidemicKabu
4
4
4
https://pypi.org/project/EpidemicKabu/
(Galvis
et al.
,
2024
)
, which is designed to identify epidemic waves by detecting peaks, valleys, and inflection points in time series data. We employ the wave identification functionality to segment a given time series into different waves. Wave detection involves (
i
i
) smoothing the timeseries using a Gaussian kernel, (
i
​
i
ii
) determining cut points in the smoothed first derivative where the first derivative crosses the x-axis from negative to positive, and (
i
​
i
​
i
iii
) selecting the detected cut points whose second derivative is less than a threshold. The output of EpidemicKabu consists of a list of cut points, where each segment between two consecutive cut points is interpreted as a potential outbreak. An example of the resulting outbreak segmentation is shown in Figure
2
.
Such a segmentation is central to the task of outbreak forecasting for multiple reasons. Typical multi-wave patterns in epidemic time series emerge due to a combination of seasonal, geographical, demographical, and biological contexts. For example, influenza epidemics exhibit strong seasonality and are often characterized by staggered peaking dynamics of different age groups. COVID-19 pandemic saw the emergence of multiple variants that resulted in distinct waves. Further, non-pharmaceutical interventions and heterogeneous population mixing could result in geographic diversity of epidemic spread that may manifest as distinct “modes” in an aggregate epidemic curve. These characteristics are often muted in the case of a novel outbreak, and hence a robust forecasting framework must be capable of leveraging latent dynamics within an isolated outbreak trajectory.
We discard segments whose duration is less than 8 weeks or greater than 52 weeks for two reasons: (i) to minimize detection of brief spikes as outbreaks, (ii) to separate out extremely long multi-seasonal trends. Additionally, to ensure that sufficient context is available around each outbreak, we append four weeks of time series data both before the start and after the end of each identified segment, which result in overlapping segments across outbreaks. This provides sufficient context for models trained on fixed windows, and also helps avoid boundary effects in feature extraction. Metadata provided per outbreak includes region (state/country), time period, disease ontology, and indicators of sporadic/seasonal patterns. Table
2
provides the data dictionary provided to the user within the dataset.
Table 2
.
Data dictionary describing the metadata and structure of the dataset.
unique_id
An unique identification number for each outbreak
disease
Type of disease (COVID-19, influenza, Smallpox, etc.)
location
Name of the location (US states, countries, etc.)
event
Type of burden indicator (cases, hospitalizations, etc.)
start_date
Start date of the outbreak (end-of-week Saturday date)
end_date
End date of the outbreak (end-of-week Saturday date)
duration
Duration of the outbreak (in weeks)
[
0
−
59
]
[0-59]
Values observed for the particular outbreak for given week (counts, %)
2.3.
Analytical measures
Since the dataset consists of diverse set of outbreaks collected over different periods, under different reporting strategies, and geographical locations, we analyze the characteristics of outbreaks using multiple statistical measures. These measures capture the uncertainty/noise and shapes of the different outbreaks.
Entropy analysis
Following the definition of
epidemic intensity
defined in
(Dalziel
et al.
,
2018
)
, we compute the Shannon entropy of the incidence distribution of each outbreak, such that it is minimized when incidence is spread evenly across weeks and increases as incidence becomes more intensively focused in particular weeks. The incidence curve of an outbreak
i
i
is normalized, that is,
𝐱
¯
z
(
0
:
T
i
)
=
1
∑
t
=
0
T
i
x
z
​
(
t
)
𝐱
z
(
0
:
T
i
)
\mathbf{\bar{x}}_{z}(0:T_{i})=\frac{1}{\sum_{t=0}^{T_{i}}x_{z}(t)}\mathbf{x}_{z}(0:T_{i})
to obtain the incidence distribution. The Shannon entropy is computed over the probability distribution.
Permutation Entropy analysis
We employ permutation entropy (PE)
(Bandt and Pompe,
2002
)
to characterize the diversity of short-term ordinal patterns within individual outbreaks. PE is a model-free measure of uncertainty in a signal and has been used to quantify the uncertainty and predictability of epidemic time series
(Scarpino and Petri,
2019
)
. In contrast to the Shannon entropy, PE does not consider the frequency of state changes but the frequency of permutation patterns (ordinal patterns) within a signal and is characterized by an embedding dimension (order) and a delay parameter. We consider embedding dimension of 3, referring to the number of consecutive data points in a time series that are grouped to form the embedding vector. This, in turn, determines the number of ordinal patterns that can be obtained (for an embedding dimension
d
=
3
d=3
, the number of possible patterns would be
d
!
=
3
!
d!=3!
). The delay parameter determines the temporal resolution at which the patterns are analyzed and we fix the delay to be 1 week (also known as no skip) in our analysis. Signals with high stochasticity (pure white noise) will likely have all patterns occur with equal frequency and are characterized by a high PE value. On the other hand, a perfectly periodic signal will typically have low entropy. We refer the readers to
(Bandt and Pompe,
2002
)
for more details, insights, and examples of PE and its parameters.
Skewness and Kurtosis
These statistical measures obtained as the third and fourth moments of the incidence distribution help characterize the outbreak shape in terms of asymmetry (skewness) and tailedness/peakedness (kurtosis) relative to a normal curve.
2.4.
Baseline methods
We evaluate four types of forecasting methods as baselines in this study: i). Statistical Methods, including ARIMA (Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average) and ETS (Exponential Smoothing)
(Hyndman and Athanasopoulos,
2018
; Garza
et al.
,
2022
)
. ii). Recurrent neural network (RNN)-based methods, including GRU (Gated Recurrent Unit)
(Cho
et al.
,
2014
)
, LSTM (Long Short Term Memory)
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber,
1997
)
, RNN (Recurrent Neural Network)
(Elman,
1990
)
, and TCN (Temporal Convolution Network)
(Lea
et al.
,
2017
)
. iii). Transformer-based methods, including Temporal Fusion Transformer (TFT)
(Lim
et al.
,
2021
)
, and Informer
(Zhou
et al.
,
2021
)
. iv) Multilayer Perceptron (MLP)-based methods: including vanilla MLP
(Goodfellow
et al.
,
2016
)
, Neural Basis Expansion Analysis for Time Series Forecasting (NBEATS)
(Oreshkin
et al.
,
2020
)
, and Neural hierarchical interpolation for time series forecasting (NHITS)
(Challu
et al.
,
2023
)
. All statistical and deep-learning model implementations are based on the unified and efficient forecasting framework provided by
Nixtla’s
StatsForecast
(Garza
et al.
,
2022
)
and
NeuralForecast
(Olivares
et al.
,
2022
)
libraries. The motivation for using
Nixtla
is that it offers a unified API for a wide range of state-of-the-art statistical and deep learning models and robust support for hyperparameter tuning via Optuna or Ray. Its modular design and scalability make it well-suited for benchmarking diverse forecasting methods under consistent experimental settings.
All the models are trained to produce probabilistic forecasts. Nixtla’s ARIMA and ETS produce uncertainty through parametric predictive distributions implied by the fitted statistical models. Forecast variances are derived analytically from estimated model residuals assuming Gaussian errors and propagated across horizons to obtain prediction intervals and quantiles. Nixtla’s deep learning models generate uncertainty through quantile regression, training neural networks with multi-quantile (pinball) losses to predict multiple forecast quantiles without assuming an explicit data-generating distribution. We set the number of quantiles to 23 consistent with the recommendations from the FluSight and COVID-19 forecast hubs
(Mathis
et al.
,
2024
; Cramer
et al.
,
2021
)
.
2.4.1.
Model Training/Fitting and Testing
To accommodate the different classes of baselines, we adopt a model-class-specific training/fitting strategies. Since all models are intended for real-time deployment (Section
2.1
), they are designed to operate under an expanding window setting (see timeseries cross-validation technique in
(Hyndman and Athanasopoulos,
2018
)
). Specifically, as an outbreak progresses, models have access to an expanding set of observations
x
z
(
0
:
u
)
\textbf{x}_{z}(0:u)
,
7
≤
u
≤
T
i
−
h
,
∀
z
7\leq u\leq T_{i}-h,\forall z
. We impose a minimum window of eight and a maximum of
T
i
−
h
T_{i}-h
for training/fitting of the models.
In the case of statistical models (ARIMA, ETS), for a given
z
z
, a model is fit on each of the expanding-window of observations
x
z
(
0
:
u
)
\textbf{x}_{z}(0:u)
,
7
≤
u
≤
T
i
−
h
7\leq u\leq T_{i}-h
. The testing is performed by generating out-of-sample forecasts from the fitted model for horizons
(
u
+
1
:
u
+
h
)
,
7
≤
u
≤
T
i
−
h
(u+1:u+h),7\leq u\leq T_{i}-h
and evaluating the forecasts against the observed values. We employ the
AutoARIMA
model provided by Nixtla to automatically select the optimal ARIMA parameters.
For the remaining model classes that require explicit training, we adopt a unified training/validation/testing strategy. Rather than splitting data along the temporal dimension, we partition the dataset across outbreaks. We shuffle the unique_ids and split them into training/validation/testing sets in a 60%/20%/20% fashion, respectively. Consequently, during testing, models are evaluated on completely unseen outbreaks.
During training, we tune key hyperparamters and select the optimal model parameters based on the model’s performance on the validation set. We employed the hyperparameter optimization framework
Optuna
(Akiba
et al.
,
2019
)
to determine the optimal set of hyperparameters. Following are the set of key tunable hyperparameters along with the search space:
•
input_size
, which controls the length of the historical look-back window used as input to the model, sampled as an integer between
[
8
,
max_input_size
]
[8,\texttt{max\_input\_size}]
.
•
learning_rate
, which specifies the optimizer step size during model training and is sampled on a logarithmic scale between
10
−
4
10^{-4}
and
10
−
2
10^{-2}
.
•
batch_size
, which specifies the number of samples processed per training optimization step and is selected from the set
{
16
,
32
,
64
}
\{16,32,64\}
.
Forecasting on the full test set requires generating
48
×
4
=
192
48\times 4=192
forecasts for each of the  2000 outbreaks and is time consuming. To enable efficient evaluation, we randomly sample minibatches of 100 outbreaks from the test set and compute the forecast performance on each minibatch. This procedure is repeated multiple times, and final performance metrics are obtained by averaging the performance across minibatches.
2.5.
Forecast Evaluation Metrics
2.5.1.
Point Forecasts
Although our baseline models are designed to provide probabilistic forecasts, to lower the barrier for entry for new models, we also include evaluation metrics for point forecasts.
Specifically, we include normalized versions of error metrics to be scale-agnostic across the outbreaks. We consider mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) and normalized mean square error (NMSE)
(Tabataba
et al.
,
2017
)
obtained for each forecast target, and averaged across outbreaks, timepoints, and horizons. For the baseline model forecasts, we assumed the values corresponding to the median (quantile level = 0.5) as the point forecasts.
2.5.2.
Probabilistic Forecasts
In order to compare the forecast quantiles of the different models, we use the Weighted Interval Score (WIS), the de facto standard in epidemiological forecasting community for probabilistic forecast evaluation
(Bracher
et al.
,
2020
)
:
W
​
I
​
S
α
0
:
k
​
(
F
,
y
)
=
\displaystyle WIS_{\alpha_{0:k}}(F,y)=
1
K
+
0.5
​
∑
k
=
0
K
α
k
2
​
(
u
k
−
l
k
)
+
2
α
k
​
(
l
k
−
y
)
​
𝟙
​
(
y
<
l
k
)
+
\displaystyle\frac{1}{K+0.5}\sum_{k=0}^{K}\frac{\alpha_{k}}{2}(u_{k}-l_{k})+\frac{2}{\alpha_{k}}(l_{k}-y)\mathbbm{1}(y<l_{k})+
(1)
2
α
k
​
(
y
−
u
k
)
​
𝟙
​
(
y
>
u
k
)
\displaystyle\frac{2}{\alpha_{k}}(y-u_{k})\mathbbm{1}(y>u_{k})
where
y
y
is the observed value (ground truth case count corresponding to a week) for a given location and date,
F
F
is the forecast defined in terms of the median
m
m
, upper quantiles
u
k
u_{k}
and lower quantiles
l
k
l_{k}
of the predictive distribution, respectively.
K
K
is the number of intervals considered, which in our case
K
=
11
K=11
. Since WIS is scale dependent, we divide the obtained WIS for a given target by its ground truth value, hence yielding a normalized weighted interval score (NWIS).
3.
Results
(a)
Entropy distribution
(b)
Permutation Entropy distribution
(c)
Skewness and Excess Kurtosis
Figure 3
.
Analytical measures on the IDOBE dataset
3.1.
Dataset characteristics
Before describing the insights obtained from the analytical measures, we note that as seen in Table
1
, the number of outbreaks vary widely across diseases, depending on the historical trends as well as quality of data capture. For instance, historical vaccine-preventable disease such as poliomyelitis and measles contribute the largest number of outbreaks. Even though spanning fewer years of data capture, due to the global nature of COVID-19 pandemic and seasonal patterns in influenza, they contribute sizeable number of outbreaks as well.
3.2.
Analytical measures
Figure
3(a)
shows the distribution of entropies across outbreaks obtained per (disease, outcome) tuple. We observe an universal mode centered around 5, with heterogeneity across diseases. Diseases such as poliomyelitis and smaller have broader entropy distributions, indicating the presence of both sharp (i.e., low entropy) and flatter outbreaks. From Figure
3(b)
, we note that most outbreaks have high entropy among ordinal patterns of order 3, thus signaling significant noisiness. Certain outbreaks such as those of RSV hospitalizations seem to have lower PE thus hinting at better predictability
(Scarpino and Petri,
2019
)
. Finally, as seen in Figure
3(c)
, most of the outbreaks have negative excess kurtosis (i.e., platykurtic) and positive skew compared to the normal curve. While negative kurtosis confirms the presence of flatter outbreaks, positive skewness indicates the typical “left-skewed” nature of epidemic curves with steep inclines before peak and slower declines post-peak. In addition to limited training data, such a characteristic could also result in lower predictability for the early phases for a novel outbreak.
3.3.
Baseline performance
Table
3
shows the performance of the 11 baseline models across different forecast horizons (1- to 4-week ahead) as well as combined performance. We note that performance degrades quickly across horizons. For shorter horizons, both statistical (ETS) and transformer based (TFT) methods perform best. For longer horizones, MLP-based methods have better performance, with MLP performing best for all error metrics for the 4-week ahead.
Further, we consider post- and pre-peak performance since epidemiological these might vary in relevance for policymakers
(Tabataba
et al.
,
2017
)
. We observe that the statistical models (ETS) perform best in pre-peak time points, where as transformer-based methods (TFT) perform better for post-peak time points. We also observe that MLP-based methods performance consistently well across both pre- and post-peak phases. This phase-dependent behavior underscores the importance of phase-specific model training and selection
(Adiga
et al.
,
2022b
)
.
Model performance also vary across diseases and outcomes. As seen in Figure
A.1
, all baseline models seem to have poorer performance for poliomyelitis and smallpox cases, with better performance for ILI and Influenza hospitalizations. Average model performance across forecast horizons is shown in Figure
A.2
, with more gradual degradation seen for LSTM and TFT, where statistical models like ARIMA and ETS show a more rapid decline in performance with forecast horizon.
4.
Discussion
In this paper, we presented IDOBE, a novel infectious disease outbreak forecasting benchmark ecosystem, comprising preprocessed outbreaks, baseline models, and evaluation metrics. In addition to characterizing the epidemic outbreaks through various analytical measures, we summarize the performance of baseline models within the epidemiological context. Note that the core premise of this work is the need for and ability to segment epidemic surveillance into single-wave outbreaks for benchmarking purposes. We acknowledge that such an approach inherently neglects multi-wave dynamics that may arise from policy changes, spatial heterogeneity and viral evolution. IDOBE, in its current form, is best seen as a benchmark for single-outbreak short-term forecasting and fills an obvious gap in methods development for effective infectious disease response.
We also focus on univariate forecasting at the level of single location, and disease outcomes. Spatial coupling and models that leverage relationship among multivariate signals have found success in real-time epidemic forecasting. Further, we have not considered mechanistic constraints (e.g., population sizes, disease models) have not been exploited in the current baseline models. We intend to expand IDOBE in future versions to include more sophisticated baseline methods as well as additional epidemiological relevant forecast targets (e.g., peak intensity, total duration). Finally, we also envision incorporating epidemic simulators to produce plausible synthetic outbreaks to augment such benchmark datasets.
5.
Data and model availability
IDOBE is openly available at
https://github.com/NSSAC/IDOBE
. The repository includes of
(
i
)
(i)
outbreak data comprising over 10,000 outbreak timeseries across multiple diseases,
(
i
​
i
)
(ii)
tools for data preprocessing, (
i
​
i
​
i
iii
) scripts for extracting analytical measures to analyze outbreaks, (
i
​
v
iv
) a suite of trained baseline forecasting models,
(
v
)
(v)
probabilistic forecast formatting and evaluation scripts.
Figure 4
.
Forecast performance by NWIS pre- and post-outbreak peak date.
Table 3
.
Summary of forecast performance across models and horizons. Best (lowest) value per row is boldfaced.
Horizon
Metric
Statistical
MLP
Transformer
RNN
ARIMA
ETS
MLP
NBEATS
NHITS
Informer
TFT
GRU
LSTM
RNN
TCN
4-week
NWIS
6.4
5.7
3.4
3.5
3.3
4.5
3.3
4.6
4.9
5.3
6.1
NMSE
1.6
1.3
1.5
1.4
1.4
2.5
1.4
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.5
MAPE
113.3
76.2
67.3
65.8
62.9
89.7
61.3
72.4
74.6
80.4
115.9
1st wk
NWIS
4.0
4.1
3.4
2.7
2.8
4.5
2.7
4.3
4.5
4.8
4.8
NMSE
1.2
1.1
1.6
1.3
1.4
2.6
1.2
1.5
1.6
1.5
1.4
MAPE
67.1
56.1
65.3
51.5
53.7
87.3
49.5
68.1
68.2
76.7
89.7
2nd wk
NWIS
5.6
5.2
3.4
3.2
3.1
4.5
3.1
4.5
4.7
5.0
5.8
NMSE
1.4
1.3
1.5
1.3
1.3
2.5
1.4
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.5
MAPE
95.3
69.0
68.1
60.9
58.9
88.5
58.6
70.7
72.2
78.0
110.0
3rd wk
NWIS
7.3
6.2
3.5
3.7
3.4
4.6
3.5
4.7
5.0
5.4
6.8
NMSE
1.8
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.5
2.5
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.6
MAPE
130.4
82.6
67.7
70.6
66.6
91.2
65.5
74.0
76.6
81.1
122.4
4th wk
NWIS
9.1
7.4
3.5
4.3
3.8
4.7
3.9
5.0
5.4
5.8
7.4
NMSE
2.1
1.6
1.3
1.4
1.6
2.5
1.5
1.5
1.6
1.5
1.6
MAPE
166.2
99.9
68.1
81.9
73.5
92.1
72.8
77.3
82.1
86.4
144.9
References
[1]
A. Adiga, G. Kaur, B. Hurt, L. Wang, P. Porebski, S. Venkatramanan, B. Lewis, and M. Marathe
(2022)
Enhancing covid-19 ensemble forecasting model performance using auxiliary data sources
.
In
2022 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data)
,
pp. 1594–1603
.
Cited by:
§1
.
[2]
A. Adiga, G. Kaur, B. Hurt, L. Wang, P. Porebski, S. Venkatramanan, B. Lewis, and M. Marathe
(2022)
Enhancing covid-19 ensemble forecasting model performance using auxiliary data sources
.
In
2022 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data)
,
Vol.
,
pp. 1594–1603
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3.3
.
[3]
A. Adiga, L. Wang, B. Hurt, A. Peddireddy, P. Porebski, S. Venkatramanan, B. L. Lewis, and M. Marathe
(2021)
All models are useful: bayesian ensembling for robust high resolution covid-19 forecasting
.
In
Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining
,
pp. 2505–2513
.
Cited by:
§1
.
[4]
T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, and M. Koyama
(2019)
Optuna: a next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework
.
In
Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining
,
pp. 2623–2631
.
Cited by:
§2.4.1
.
[5]
T. Aksu, G. Woo, J. Liu, X. Liu, C. Liu, S. Savarese, C. Xiong, and D. Sahoo
(2024)
Gift-eval: a benchmark for general time series forecasting model evaluation
.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10393
.
Cited by:
§1.2
.
[6]
C. Bandt and B. Pompe
(2002)
Permutation entropy: a natural complexity measure for time series
.
Physical review letters
88
(
17
),
pp. 174102
.
Cited by:
§2.3
.
[7]
M. Biggerstaff, D. Alper, M. Dredze, S. Fox, I. C. Fung, K. S. Hickmann, B. Lewis, R. Rosenfeld, J. Shaman, M. Tsou,
et al.
(2016)
Results from the centers for disease control and prevention’s predict the 2013–2014 influenza season challenge
.
BMC infectious diseases
16
,
pp. 1–10
.
Cited by:
§1.2
,
§1
.
[8]
R. K. Borchering, J. M. Healy, B. L. Cadwell, M. A. Johansson, R. B. Slayton, M. Wallace, and M. Biggerstaff
(2023)
Public health impact of the us scenario modeling hub
.
Epidemics
44
,
pp. 100705
.
Cited by:
§1
.
[9]
N. I. Bosse, H. Gruson, A. Cori, E. van Leeuwen, S. Funk, and S. Abbott
(2022)
Evaluating forecasts with scoringutils in r
.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.07090
.
Cited by:
§1
.
[10]
J. Bracher, E. L. Ray, T. Gneiting, and N. G. Reich
(2020)
Evaluating epidemic forecasts in an interval format
.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.12881
.
Cited by:
4th item
,
§2.5.2
.
[11]
C. Challu, K. G. Olivares, B. N. Oreshkin, F. García, G. Mena, and A. Dubrawski
(2023)
NHITS: neural hierarchical interpolation for time series forecasting
.
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
37
(
6
),
pp. 6989–6997
.
Cited by:
§2.4
.
[12]
K. Cho, B. van Merriënboer, C. Gulcehre, D. Bahdanau, F. Bougares, H. Schwenk, and Y. Bengio
(2014)
Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder–decoder for statistical machine translation
.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1078
.
Cited by:
§2.4
.
[13]
E. Y. Cramer, Y. Huang, Y. Wang, E. L. Ray, M. Cornell, J. Bracher, A. Brennen, A. J. C. Rivadeneira, A. Gerding, K. House,
et al.
(2021)
The united states covid-19 forecast hub dataset
.
medRxiv
.
Cited by:
§1.2
,
§1
,
§2.2.1
,
§2.4
.
[14]
E. Y. Cramer, E. L. Ray, V. K. Lopez, J. Bracher, A. Brennen, A. J. Castro Rivadeneira, A. Gerding, T. Gneiting, K. H. House, Y. Huang,
et al.
(2022)
Evaluation of individual and ensemble probabilistic forecasts of covid-19 mortality in the united states
.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
119
(
15
),
pp. e2113561119
.
Cited by:
§1.2
,
§1
.
[15]
B. D. Dalziel, S. Kissler, J. R. Gog, C. Viboud, O. N. Bjørnstad, C. J. E. Metcalf, and B. T. Grenfell
(2018)
Urbanization and humidity shape the intensity of influenza epidemics in us cities
.
Science
362
(
6410
),
pp. 75–79
.
Cited by:
2nd item
,
§2.3
.
[16]
S. Y. Del Valle, B. H. McMahon, J. Asher, R. Hatchett, J. C. Lega, H. E. Brown, M. E. Leany, Y. Pantazis, D. J. Roberts, S. Moore,
et al.
(2018)
Summary results of the 2014-2015 darpa chikungunya challenge
.
BMC infectious diseases
18
,
pp. 1–14
.
Cited by:
§1.2
.
[17]
E. Dong, H. Du, and L. Gardner
(2020)
An interactive web-based dashboard to track covid-19 in real time
.
The Lancet infectious diseases
20
(
5
),
pp. 533–534
.
Cited by:
1st item
,
§2.2.1
,
§2.2.1
.
[18]
J. L. Elman
(1990)
Finding structure in time
.
Cognitive Science
14
(
2
),
pp. 179–211
.
Cited by:
§2.4
.
[19]
C. for Disease Control and Prevention
Outbreak and case definitions
.
Note:
https://www.cdc.gov/urdo/php/surveillance/outbreak-case-definitions.html
Accessed: 2025-05-14
Cited by:
footnote 1
.
[20]
L. M. R. Galvis, A. A. R. Barbosa, O. I. M. Cardozo, N. C. Barengo, J. L. Peñalvo, and P. A. D. Valencia
(2024)
EpidemicKabu a new method to identify epidemic waves and their peaks and valleys
.
medRxiv
,
pp. 2024–03
.
Cited by:
§2.2.2
.
[21]
A. Garza, M. M. Canseco, C. Challú, and K. G. Olivares
(2022)
StatsForecast: lightning fast forecasting with statistical and econometric models
.
Note:
PyCon Salt Lake City, Utah, US 2022
External Links:
Link
Cited by:
§2.4
.
[22]
T. Gneiting, F. Balabdaoui, and A. E. Raftery
(2007)
Probabilistic forecasts, calibration and sharpness
.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology
69
(
2
),
pp. 243–268
.
Cited by:
§2.1
.
[23]
I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville
(2016)
Deep learning
.
MIT Press
.
Cited by:
§2.4
.
[24]
S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber
(1997)
Long short-term memory
.
Neural Computation
9
(
8
),
pp. 1735–1780
.
Cited by:
§2.4
.
[25]
K. M. Holcomb, S. Mathis, J. E. Staples, M. Fischer, C. M. Barker, C. B. Beard, R. J. Nett, A. C. Keyel, M. Marcantonio, M. L. Childs,
et al.
(2023)
Evaluation of an open forecasting challenge to assess skill of west nile virus neuroinvasive disease prediction
.
Parasites & Vectors
16
(
1
),
pp. 11
.
Cited by:
§1.2
.
[26]
R. J. Hyndman and G. Athanasopoulos
(2018)
Forecasting: principles and practice
.
OTexts
.
Cited by:
§2.4.1
,
§2.4
.
[27]
M. A. Johansson, K. M. Apfeldorf, S. Dobson, J. Devita, A. L. Buczak, B. Baugher, L. J. Moniz, T. Bagley, S. M. Babin, E. Guven,
et al.
(2019)
An open challenge to advance probabilistic forecasting for dengue epidemics
.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
116
(
48
),
pp. 24268–24274
.
Cited by:
§1.2
.
[28]
S. Kalahasti, B. Faucher, B. Wang, C. Ascione, R. Carbajal, M. Enault, C. V. Cassis, T. Launay, C. Guerrisi, P. Boëlle,
et al.
(2025)
Foundation time series models for forecasting and policy evaluation in infectious disease epidemics
.
medRxiv
,
pp. 2025–02
.
Cited by:
§1.2
.
[29]
H. Kamarthi and B. A. Prakash
(2023)
PEMS: pre-trained epidemic time-series models
.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07841
.
Cited by:
§1.2
,
§1
.
[30]
M. Kerr, R. Borchering, A. C. Rivadeneira, L. Contamin, S. Funk, H. Hochheiser, E. Howerton, A. Krystalli, L. Shandross, N. G. Reich,
et al.
(2025)
Coordinating collaborative infectious disease modeling projects with the hubverse
.
medRxiv: the preprint server for health sciences
.
Cited by:
3rd item
,
§1
.
[31]
C. Lea, M. D. Flynn, R. Vidal, A. Reiter, and G. D. Hager
(2017)
Temporal convolutional networks for action segmentation and detection
.
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)
,
pp. 156–165
.
Cited by:
§2.4
.
[32]
B. Lim, S. Ö. Arık, N. Loeff, and T. Pfister
(2021)
Temporal fusion transformers for interpretable multi-horizon time series forecasting
.
International Journal of Forecasting
37
(
4
),
pp. 1748–1764
.
Cited by:
§2.4
.
[33]
S. L. Loo, E. Howerton, L. Contamin, C. P. Smith, R. K. Borchering, L. C. Mullany, S. Bents, E. Carcelen, S. Jung, T. Bogich,
et al.
(2024)
The us covid-19 and influenza scenario modeling hubs: delivering long-term projections to guide policy
.
Epidemics
46
,
pp. 100738
.
Cited by:
§1
.
[34]
V. K. Lopez, E. Y. Cramer, R. Pagano, J. M. Drake, E. B. O’Dea, M. Adee, T. Ayer, J. Chhatwal, O. O. Dalgic, M. A. Ladd,
et al.
(2024)
Challenges of covid-19 case forecasting in the us, 2020–2021
.
PLoS computational biology
20
(
5
),
pp. e1011200
.
Cited by:
§1.2
.
[35]
R. S. López-Peñalver, R. Cañas-Cañas, J. Casaña-Mohedo, J. V. Benavent-Cervera, J. Fernández-Garrido, R. Juárez-Vela, A. Pellín-Carcelén, V. Gea-Caballero, and V. Andreu-Fernández
(2023)
Predictive potential of SARS-Cov-2 RNA concentration in wastewater to assess the dynamics of COVID-19 clinical outcomes and infections
.
Science of The Total Environment
886
,
pp. 163935
.
Cited by:
§1
.
[36]
C. S. Lutz, M. P. Huynh, M. Schroeder, S. Anyatonwu, F. S. Dahlgren, G. Danyluk, D. Fernandez, S. K. Greene, N. Kipshidze, L. Liu,
et al.
(2019)
Applying infectious disease forecasting to public health: a path forward using influenza forecasting examples
.
BMC Public Health
19
(
1
),
pp. 1659
.
Cited by:
§1
.
[37]
S. Makridakis and M. Hibon
(2000)
The m3-competition: results, conclusions and implications
.
International journal of forecasting
16
(
4
),
pp. 451–476
.
Cited by:
§1.2
.
[38]
S. Makridakis, E. Spiliotis, and V. Assimakopoulos
(2020)
The m4 competition: 100,000 time series and 61 forecasting methods
.
International Journal of Forecasting
36
(
1
),
pp. 54–74
.
Cited by:
§1.2
.
[39]
S. Makridakis, E. Spiliotis, and V. Assimakopoulos
(2022)
The m5 competition: background, organization, and implementation
.
International Journal of Forecasting
38
(
4
),
pp. 1325–1336
.
Cited by:
§1.2
.
[40]
S. M. Mathis, A. E. Webber, T. M. León, E. L. Murray, M. Sun, L. A. White, L. C. Brooks, A. Green, A. J. Hu, R. Rosenfeld,
et al.
(2024)
Evaluation of flusight influenza forecasting in the 2021–22 and 2022–23 seasons with a new target laboratory-confirmed influenza hospitalizations
.
Nature communications
15
(
1
),
pp. 6289
.
Cited by:
§1.2
,
§1
,
§2.2.1
,
§2.4
.
[41]
K. G. Olivares, C. Challú, F. Garza, M. M. Canseco, and A. Dubrawski
(2022)
NeuralForecast: user friendly state-of-the-art neural forecasting models.
.
Note:
PyCon Salt Lake City, Utah, US 2022
External Links:
Link
Cited by:
§2.4
.
[42]
B. N. Oreshkin, D. Carpov, N. Chapados, and Y. Bengio
(2020)
N-BEATS: neural basis expansion analysis for interpretable time series forecasting
.
International Conference on Learning Representations
.
Cited by:
§2.4
.
[43]
N. G. Reich, L. C. Brooks, S. J. Fox, S. Kandula, C. J. McGowan, E. Moore, D. Osthus, E. L. Ray, A. Tushar, T. K. Yamana,
et al.
(2019)
A collaborative multiyear, multimodel assessment of seasonal influenza forecasting in the united states
.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
116
(
8
),
pp. 3146–3154
.
Cited by:
§1.2
,
§1
,
§1
.
[44]
R. Rosenfeld and R. J. Tibshirani
(2021)
Epidemic tracking and forecasting: lessons learned from a tumultuous year
.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
118
(
51
),
pp. e2111456118
.
Cited by:
§1.2
.
[45]
S. V. Scarpino and G. Petri
(2019)
On the predictability of infectious disease outbreaks
.
Nature communications
10
(
1
),
pp. 898
.
Cited by:
2nd item
,
§2.3
,
§3.2
.
[46]
L. Shandross, E. Howerton, L. Contamin, H. Hochheiser, A. Krystalli, N. G. Reich, E. L. Ray,
et al.
(2025)
Multi-model ensembles in infectious disease and public health: methods, interpretation, and implementation in r
.
medRxiv
,
pp. 2024–06
.
Cited by:
§1
.
[47]
A. Srivastava, T. Xu, and V. K. Prasanna
(2021)
The epibench platform to propel ai/ml-based epidemic forecasting: a prototype demonstration reaching human expert-level performance
.
In
International Workshop on Health Intelligence
,
pp. 165–179
.
Cited by:
§1.2
.
[48]
F. S. Tabataba, P. Chakraborty, N. Ramakrishnan, S. Venkatramanan, J. Chen, B. Lewis, and M. Marathe
(2017)
A framework for evaluating epidemic forecasts
.
BMC infectious diseases
17
(
1
),
pp. 345
.
Cited by:
§2.5.1
,
§3.3
.
[49]
W. G. van Panhuis, A. Cross, and D. S. Burke
(2018)
Project tycho 2.0: a repository to improve the integration and reuse of data for global population health
.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
25
(
12
),
pp. 1608–1617
.
Cited by:
1st item
,
§2.2.1
,
§2.2.1
.
[50]
H. Zhou, S. Zhang, J. Peng, S. Zhang, J. Li, H. Xiong, and W. Zhang
(2021)
Informer: beyond efficient transformer for long sequence time-series forecasting
.
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
35
(
12
),
pp. 11106–11115
.
Cited by:
§2.4
.
Appendix A
Disease- and Outcome-Specific Baseline Performance
Figure A.1
.
Disease-specific performance across models by different error metrics
Figure A.2
.
Average model performance across forecast horizons.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA