LightCurveLynx: Forward Modeling of Time-Domain Surveys with Application to ZTF SN Ia DR2
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
I
Introduction
II
LightCurveLynx
III
Simulating the ZTF SN Ia Data Release 2 sample
III.1
Parameter Models and Physical Models
III.1.1
Host-galaxy Model
III.1.2
SN Ia SED Model
III.1.3
Data-driven Parameter Models with
pzflow
III.1.4
Rate Model and Total Number of SNe
III.1.5
Cosmology and Nuisance Parameters
III.2
Observing Logs
III.3
Time and Filter Matching
III.4
Effects
III.5
Filter Transmission Curves
III.6
Noise Estimation
III.7
Selection Effects
Detection
Spectroscopic efficiency
Light curve quality cuts
Modeling selection effects in parameter models
III.8
Light Curve Fitting
IV
Results
IV.1
Data and Simulation Comparisons
IV.1.1
An Example Light Curve
IV.1.2
Sample Statistics
IV.1.3
Parameter Distributions
Redshift distribution
SALT parameter distributions
Host mass distribution and
host mass
−
x
1
\textrm{host mass}-x_{1}
relation
IV.1.4
Noise Properties
Signal-to-noise ratio
Flux vs flux error contours
IV.2
Hubble Diagram
IV.3
Simulation Performance
V
Discussions and Conclusion
A
Caveats about Sky Background
Acknowledgements
References
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2604.07134v1 [astro-ph.IM] 08 Apr 2026
LightCurveLynx: Forward Modeling of Time-Domain Surveys with Application to ZTF SN Ia DR2
Mi Dai
Pittsburgh Particle Physics, Astrophysics, and Cosmology Center (PITT PACC),
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
mi.dai@pitt.edu
Jeremy Kubica
McWilliams Center for Cosmology and Astrophysics, Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
jkubica@andrew.cmu.edu
Konstantin Malanchev
McWilliams Center for Cosmology and Astrophysics, Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
malanchev@cmu.edu
Alex I. Malz
Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
aimalz@nyu.edu
Olivia Lynn
McWilliams Center for Cosmology and Astrophysics, Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
olynn@andrew.cmu.edu
Andrew Connolly
DiRAC Institute and the Department of Astronomy, University of Washington, 3910 15th Ave NE, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
ajc@astro.washington.edu
Rachel Mandelbaum
McWilliams Center for Cosmology and Astrophysics, Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
rmandelb@andrew.cmu.edu
W.M. Wood-Vasey
Pittsburgh Particle Physics, Astrophysics, and Cosmology Center (PITT PACC),
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
wmwv@pitt.edu
Mi Dai
mi.dai@pitt.edu
Abstract
We present
LightCurveLynx
, a flexible and extensible software framework for end-to-end forward modeling time-domain light curves.
Given the growing need for realistic simulations in the time-domain astronomy community,
LightCurveLynx
is designed to support a wide range of applications, including the development and validation of analysis pipelines, the optimization of survey strategies, and simulation-based inference studies. Realistic simulations can be generated from real survey metadata, forecasted survey plans, or user-defined mock survey strategies.
We demonstrate the functionality of
LightCurveLynx
by generating a realistic simulation of Type Ia supernovae that is representative of the ZTF SN Ia Data Release 2 dataset and perform extensive comparisons between the simulated and observed samples to validate the software.
The simulation shows excellent agreement with the data in parameter distributions (with the Kullback-Leibler divergence values around 0.01-0.02) and in noise properties. The Hubble diagram generated from the simulation also indicates that the sample is complete up to redshift 0.06, which is consistent with previous studies.
Our results confirm that
LightCurveLynx
is robust, accurate, and ready for community use and contribution.
Type Ia supernovae (1728), Astronomical simulations (1857), Astronomy software (1855), Time domain astronomy (2109)
†
†
facilities:
PO:1.2m, PO:1.5m
†
†
software:
Astropy
(Astropy Collaboration et al.,
2013
,
2018
,
2022
)
,
dust_extinction
(K. D. Gordon,
2024
)
LightCurveLynx
(
J. Kubica et al.
in prep
; Dai et al. 2026, this work),
Matplotlib
(J. D. Hunter,
2007
)
,
Numpy
(C. R. Harris et al.,
2020
)
,
Nested-Pandas
(LINCC Frameworks,
2025
)
,
Pandas
(T. pandas development team,
2020
; Wes McKinney,
2010
)
,
PZFlow
(J. F. Crenshaw et al.,
2024
)
,
SNCosmo
(K. Barbary et al.,
2016
,
2025
)
,
scikit-learn
(F. Pedregosa et al.,
2011
)
,
Scipy
(P. Virtanen et al.,
2020
)
,
sfdmap2
(K. Barbary & AmpelAstro,
2023
)
,
I
Introduction
Realistic simulations of light curves are an essential component of modern time-domain astrophysics.
They enable the development and evaluation of classification algorithms
(R. Kessler et al.,
2010
,
2019
; R. Hlozek et al.,
2023
)
, the optimization of survey strategies
(M. Lochner et al.,
2018
; P. Gris et al.,
2024
; B. M. Rose et al.,
2025
)
, the validation of analysis pipelines
(R. Kessler et al.,
2009
)
, the characterization and correction of systematic biases
(R. Kessler & D. Scolnic,
2017
; B. M. Boyd et al.,
2024
; M. Vincenzi et al.,
2024
)
, and the inference of astrophysical and cosmological parameters
(A. Weyant et al.,
2013
; E. Jennings et al.,
2016
)
.
While many groups in the astronomy community have independently created impressive simulation packages for their science domains, these solutions remain fragmented and features vary from solution to solution. At the same time, the demand for a unified, flexible, scalable, and user-friendly simulation framework has grown rapidly as new facilities with unprecedented discovery power and photometric precision, such as the Vera C. Rubin Observatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and Time
(LSST, LSST Science Collaborations and LSST Project,
2009
; Ž. Ivezić et al.,
2019
)
and the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope
(D. Spergel et al.,
2015
)
, begin operations.
LightCurveLynx
, developed by the LINCC Frameworks team,
is designed to meet these community needs.
It provides a unified, open-source framework for forward-simulation of transient and time-varying phenomena that supports both a variety of surveys and model types.
It wraps a range of popular forward modeling packages, allowing users to combine and compare models, and includes numerous observational effects.
Supported by software development best practices, it facilitates sustainable user contributions with documentation, unit tests, and continuous integration.
In this paper, we present
LightCurveLynx
in the context of a use case in which we simulate Type Ia supernova (SN Ia) light curves observed by the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF,
E. C. Bellm et al.
2019
).
We perform extensive comparisons against real data from the ZTF SN Ia Data Release 2 sample (hereafter ZTFSNDR2,
M. Rigault et al.
2025
) demonstrating both the functionality and fidelity of
LightCurveLynx
.
We provide an overview of the
LightCurveLynx
software framework in Section
II
.
In Section
III
, we describe in detail the inputs and methodology required to generate realistic simulations of the ZTFSNDR2 sample, including survey characteristics, noise modeling, supernova and host-galaxy models, parameter generation, and selection effects.
In Section
IV
, we present quantitative comparisons between the simulated and observed ZTFSNDR2 samples.
We discuss our results and conclude in Section
V
.
II
LightCurveLynx
LightCurveLynx
is a Python-based forward-modeling framework for generating realistic time-domain light curve simulations, including both transients and variable sources.
The software is designed to be flexible, scalable, and user-friendly.
Its modular architecture allows users to integrate
LightCurveLynx
into existing pipelines or construct entirely new simulation workflows by replacing or extending individual components.
Figure
1
illustrates the main components of the
LightCurveLynx
framework.
Figure 1
:
Schematic overview of the
LightCurveLynx
framework, showing the major components and data flow in a typical simulation pipeline.
A typical
LightCurveLynx
simulation begins with the definition of
Parameter Models
, which specify the statistical distributions and relationships among all physical parameters (the priors).
These dependencies can be represented as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where parameter distributions can themselves depend on the values of hyper-parameters.
LightCurveLynx
provides built-in functionality for DAG construction, manipulation, and efficient sampling.
LightCurveLynx
generates a full ensemble of parameters (stored as a
GraphState
object) that are fed into the
Physical Model
.
An essential element of the simulation pipeline is the
Physical Model
modules, which provide a recipe for generating samples from a time-varying flux density (at either the spectral or photometric level) of an object with given parameters.
In addition to user-implemented physical models,
LightCurveLynx
wraps a variety of popular forward modeling packages, such as
SNCosmo
(K. Barbary et al.,
2016
,
2025
)
,
PZFlow
(J. F. Crenshaw et al.,
2024
)
and
Redback
(N. Sarin et al.,
2024
)
, allowing users to use a range of models within a consistent framework.
A list of
LightCurveLynx
-wrapped packages can be found on
LightCurveLynx
’s ReadtheDocs page
1
1
1
https://lightcurvelynx.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
, which also includes extensive API documentation and usage tutorials.
A physical model is combined with an
ObsTable
, which provides the observational characteristics of a survey, such as cadence, zeropoint, sky noise, and seeing conditions, to determine the observation times and filters for each object.
LightCurveLynx
greatly reduces computational cost and storage requirements by only sampling the flux density at times when the survey actually observes the object.
The output flux densities are then generated from the physical model and its parameters at each such time.
At this stage, the model fluxes are in the rest frame and noise-free.
Physical effects such as host-galaxy extinction or gravitational lensing can be defined through
Effect Model
modules that are applied to the simulated fluxes to generate realistic observational conditions.
The modeled flux density is then transformed to the observer frame. If the simulation has been done at the spectral level, the flux densities are integrated through the relevant
Passbands
to produce broadband fluxes.
Finally, observational noise is added to the fluxes using a
Noise Model
that depends on both the flux level and the
ObsTable
information, yielding simulated measurements that accurately reflect survey conditions.
A full description about
LightCurveLynx
’s design and functionalities is presented in
J. Kubica et al. (
in prep
)
.
III
Simulating the ZTF SN Ia Data Release 2 sample
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
presented ZTFSNDR2, a data set of 3628 SNe Ia discovered by the Zwicky Transient Facility
(ZTF, E. C. Bellm et al.,
2019
)
from 2018 to 2020.
The SNe are spectroscopically classified, with redshifts ranging from 0.002 to 0.29.
The data release includes forced photometry light curves at the SN locations, SN metadata, and observing logs providing per-exposure information for simulating cadence and realistic noise conditions.
The host galaxy data, such as angular coordinates, redshift, local and global stellar mass, and
g
−
r
g-r
color, are also included in the data release.
We describe the necessary components in the context of generating the ZTFSNDR2 simulation, following the workflow described in Figure
1
. Users can replace these components individually to generate customized simulations for their specific science cases. All the data and analysis notebooks are available in a dedicated GitHub Repository
2
2
2
https://github.com/mi-dai/lightcurvelynx_ztf_sims
.
.
III.1
Parameter Models and Physical Models
We describe the Physical Models, including the host-galaxy model and the SN Ia Spectral Energy Distribution (SED) model, as well as the Parameter Models that are used to generate the SN Ia populations, including data-driven parameter models for SN and host galaxy parameters, cosmological parameters, and the SN Ia rate.
III.1.1
Host-galaxy Model
We generate a simple host galaxy model, with only RA, Dec, and host stellar mass as parameters.
The SN angular separation from the host galaxy is generated using a distribution of physical separation roughly following that in Figure 3 of
R. R. Gupta et al. (
2016
)
, an exponential distribution,
f
​
(
x
;
1
/
β
)
=
1
/
β
×
exp
⁡
(
−
x
/
β
)
f(x;1/\beta)=1/\beta\times\exp{(-x/\beta)}
,
with the exponential scale
β
\beta
set to 5 kpc.
We relate the host galaxy stellar mass to the SN light curve parameters using a data-driven approach described in Section
III.1.3
.
LightCurveLynx
can be extended to support more complex simulations of host galaxy and SN relations, for example, SN locations based on the galaxy light profile or SN parameters correlated with additional host properties (e.g., star formation rate and metallicity;
A. Gagliano et al.
2021
; M. Lokken et al.
2023
; ELAsTiCC Team
in prep
).
III.1.2
SN Ia SED Model
We use the
SNCosmo
implementation of the SALT3 model
(W. D. Kenworthy et al.,
2021
)
, which is a newer version of the SALT model
(J. Guy et al.,
2007
,
2010
)
, because the SALT SED model is commonly used in SN Ia cosmology analyses.
The flux density is defined as:
F
​
(
t
,
λ
)
=
x
0
⋅
[
M
0
​
(
t
,
λ
)
+
x
1
⋅
M
1
​
(
t
,
λ
)
]
⋅
exp
⁡
(
c
⋅
C
​
L
​
(
λ
)
)
,
F(t,\lambda)=x_{0}\cdot\left[M_{0}(t,\lambda)+x_{1}\cdot M_{1}(t,\lambda)\right]\cdot\exp\left(c\cdot CL(\lambda)\right),
(1)
where
M
0
M_{0}
is the average spectral sequence of an SN Ia,
M
1
M_{1}
is the first-order variation, and
C
​
L
CL
is the color variation law.
x
0
,
x
1
,
c
x_{0},x_{1},c
are parameters that describe individual supernova properties and can be fitted using observed SN Ia light curves.
x
0
x_{0}
describes the overall normalization, which is related to the SN peak magnitude;
x
1
x_{1}
encodes the shape of the light curve;
c
c
describes the SN color.
The SALT3 model is only defined for rest-frame phases between -20 days and 50 days, and for rest-frame wavelengths between 2000 Å and 11000 Å. Extrapolations are applied to the original SED model beyond the model range in both the time and wavelength dimensions. Since the signals are usually low before -20 days, we pad zeros to the SED before -20 days. We apply a linear decay in the magnitude space with decay rate at 0.02 mag per day for phases after 50 days. For wavelengths, we use zero padding on both sides of the SED, since those wavelength regions are usually dominated by noise.
III.1.3
Data-driven Parameter Models with
pzflow
PZFlow
(J. F. Crenshaw et al.,
2024
)
is a python package that can model a potentially high-dimensional joint or conditional distribution of data using normalizing flows.
We used
PZFlow
to train on the ZTFSNDR2 data including the SN parameters and the host galaxy’s stellar mass. Selection functions of the SN parameters are also calculated and accounted for using
PZFlow
. We describe the selection effects and the methodology for accounting for selection effects in Section
III.7
.
III.1.4
Rate Model and Total Number of SNe
Following
M. Amenouche et al. (
2025
)
, we use a volumetric rate of
R
=
2.35
×
10
−
5
​
Mpc
−
3
​
year
−
1
R=2.35\times 10^{-5}\text{Mpc}^{-3}\text{year}^{-1}
, derived from the ZTF Bright Transient Survey data
(D. A. Perley et al.,
2020
)
.
As discussed in
M. Amenouche et al. (
2025
)
, the rate is consistent with other studies
(B. Dilday et al.,
2010
; C. Frohmaier et al.,
2019
)
for the same redshift range.
The total number of SNe Ia to generate is calculated as
N
total
=
f
corr
​
Ω
​
T
​
∫
R
​
𝑑
V
​
(
z
)
​
𝑑
z
/
(
1
+
z
)
N_{\rm total}=f_{\rm corr}\Omega T\int R\,dV(z)dz/(1+z)
, where
d
​
V
​
(
z
)
dV(z)
is the differential comoving volume as a function of redshift,
Ω
\Omega
is the survey volume in solid angle, T is the survey length in years in observer frame. We also apply a correction factor,
f
corr
=
0.867
f_{\rm corr}=0.867
. This correction factor corrects for potential missing detections due to CCD gaps
(R. G. Dekany et al.,
2020
)
.
III.1.5
Cosmology and Nuisance Parameters
We assume a flat
Λ
\Lambda
CDM cosmology with
Ω
m
=
0.315
\Omega_{\text{m}}=0.315
and
H
0
=
70
​
km
​
s
−
1
​
Mpc
−
1
H_{0}=70\,\mathrm{km\,s^{-1}\,Mpc^{-1}}
.
Using the SALT parameters, the distance modulus of SN Ia is defined as below following the Tripp Relation
(R. Tripp,
1998
)
.
μ
SN
=
m
B
+
α
​
x
1
−
β
​
c
−
M
B
\mu_{\text{SN}}=m_{B}+\alpha x_{1}-\beta c-M_{B}
(2)
where
m
B
=
−
2.5
​
log
10
⁡
x
0
+
10.635
m_{B}=-2.5\log_{10}x_{0}+10.635
, which roughly represents the SN peak magnitude in the B band.
α
\alpha
,
β
\beta
encode the amount of linear correction for SN Ia standardization.
M
B
M_{B}
is the B band absolute magnitude for the SN Ia.
Following
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
, we use
α
=
0.16
\alpha=0.16
and
β
=
3.05
\beta=3.05
, which is derived by fitting the Hubble Diagram of a volume-limited sample from ZTFSNDR2
(M. Ginolin et al.,
2025
)
.
We assume the B-band absolute magnitude of
M
B
=
−
19.08
M_{B}=-19.08
with a Gaussian scatter of
0.17
0.17
mag.
To determine the mean of the
M
B
M_{B}
distribution, we take the data from
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
, correct for the shape and color relation using Eq.
2
, and fit a Gaussian model for the mean and standard deviation.
Our fit returns
Mean
=
−
19.11
\text{Mean}=-19.11
and
std
=
0.17
\text{std}=0.17
.
After running a full simulation and applying all selection cuts, we noticed a shift of
−
0.03
-0.03
in the Gaussian Mean value.
We apply this shift to account for the selection effects in
M
B
M_{B}
(thus
Mean
​
(
M
B
)
=
−
19.08
\textrm{Mean}(M_{B})=-19.08
).
We do not include a host galaxy mass dependency as done by other analyses, as the formulation thereof is beyond the scope of this paper.
However, we note that such a dependency can also be modeled in
LightCurveLynx
using the data-driven approach described in Section
III.1.3
.
III.2
Observing Logs
We combine the observing log from
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
with the ZTF metadata database (DB) from the ZTF data release note
3
3
3
https://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/data/ZTF/docs/releases/dr23/ztf_release_notes_dr23.pdf
to obtain all necessary information for generating our simulations. The observing log contains CCD visit information from June 2018 to February 2021
4
4
4
However, the paper states that the logs are from March 2018 to December 2020.
, including observation times, coordinates, filter names, zero points, and 5
σ
\sigma
limiting magnitudes. The metadata DB supplements this with information required for realistic noise calculations, primarily the point-spread function.
The observing log is provided per CCD quadrants for each exposure.
For simplicity, we take the medians of the zero points and the 5
σ
\sigma
magnitude limits of all CCD quadrants in each exposure and drop the duplicated rows.
The standard deviation of the zero points is around 0.1 mag.
The sky background for each exposure is needed for estimating the noise. However, we find the sky background values provided in the metadata DB do not appear to represent the actual sky background measurement in the images. We therefore derive the sky background from existing information using Eq. (
3
), assuming that the 5
σ
\sigma
magnitude limit is the magnitude at which
flux
/
flux error
=
5
\texttt{flux}/\texttt{flux error}=5
. We describe the caveats in deriving the sky background in Appendix
A
.
The columns that are necessary for generating the simulation are listed in Table
1
.
The combined observing log is available from the GitHub repository
2
.
Table 1
:
Observing log column descriptions
Observing Log Column Name
Source
Description
mjd
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
MJD values of the observations.
filter
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
Filter names of the observations. Original column name:
band
.
ra
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
Right Ascension of the observations. Original column name:
fieldra
.
dec
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
Declination of the observations. Original column name:
fielddec
.
maglimit
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
5
σ
\sigma
magnitude limit of the observations.
zp_abmag
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
Median zero point across all CCD quadrants (magnitude corresponding to 1 ADU). Original column name:
zp
.
zp_nJy
Derived
Zero point (nJy/e
-
). Converted from
zp_abmag
.
fwhm
Metadata DB
Full width at half maximum of the PSF (pixel).
maglim
Metadata DB
5
σ
\sigma
magnitude limit of the observations. (This is different from
M. Rigault et al.
2025
. See Appendix
A
.)
infobits
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
Information bits of the observations.
a
sky_adu_ztfsn
Derived
Sky background (ADU). Derived as described in Section
III.2
using
maglimit
.
a
See the ZTF Science Data System (ZSDS) Explanatory Supplement:
https://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/data/ZTF/docs/ztf_explanatory_supplement.pdf
.
III.3
Time and Filter Matching
LightCurveLynx
generates a list of times and filters for computing the Physical model by matching a given sky position to the observing log. The matching is determined by computing whether the random sky position falls in the camera footprint, given the CCD configuration. For this analysis, we used the camera field dimensions listed in Table 1 of
R. G. Dekany et al. (
2020
)
. The camera field dimensions represent the full camera footprint, including CCD gaps. Since we do not model CCD gaps in the input camera footprint for our simulation, our simulation include observations that are missed in the actual survey due to these gaps. The fill factor is
86.7
%
86.7\%
(R. G. Dekany et al.,
2020
)
. We use this number to roughly approximate the number of SNe that may be reduced in the sample due to CCD gaps. We note that the actual loss number is likely different. A full simulation with the exact CCD configurations is necessary to recover the actual factor.
LightCurveLynx
supports simulations using exact CCD layouts; however, we use the approximations described above as a tradeoff for computational efficiency.
III.4
Effects
LightCurveLynx
supports built-in and user-defined physical or observational effects. For this paper, we include the Milky Way extinction as an effect. We obtain the extinction parameter E(B-V) from
D. J. Schlegel et al. (
1998
); E. F. Schlafly & D. P. Finkbeiner (
2011
)
using the
sfdmap2
package
(K. Barbary & AmpelAstro,
2023
)
wrapped by
LightCurveLynx
, and apply extinction to the observer-frame SN SED, before integrating over the passbands to generate broadband photometry. We use the extinction curve from
E. L. Fitzpatrick (
1999
)
as provided in the
dust_extinction
package
(K. D. Gordon,
2024
)
.
III.5
Filter Transmission Curves
The ZTFSNDR2 data include three passbands, g, r, and i.
We obtain the filter transmission curves from
SNCosmo
5
5
5
https://sncosmo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/bandpass-list.html
.
LightCurveLynx
provide a variety of ways to obtain transmission curves from different sources.
III.6
Noise Estimation
The total noise standard deviation in electrons for a point source is calculated following standard photon noise calculation assuming Gaussian limit for the Poisson electron count distribution:
σ
total
2
\displaystyle\sigma_{\text{total}}^{2}
=
σ
signal
2
+
σ
sky
2
+
σ
dark
2
+
σ
read
2
+
σ
zp
2
\displaystyle=\sigma_{\text{signal}}^{2}+\sigma_{\text{sky}}^{2}+\sigma_{\text{dark}}^{2}+\sigma_{\text{read}}^{2}+\sigma_{\text{zp}}^{2}
(3)
=
S
+
Sky
​
N
eff
+
D
​
t
​
N
eff
+
σ
read
2
​
N
eff
+
(
S
​
σ
zp_mag
zp_mag
​
ln
⁡
10
2.5
)
2
.
\displaystyle=S+\text{Sky}\,N_{\text{eff}}+D\,t\,N_{\text{eff}}+\sigma_{\text{read}}^{2}\,N_{\text{eff}}+\left(S\,\frac{\sigma_{\texttt{zp\_mag}}}{\texttt{zp\_mag}}\,\frac{\ln{10}}{2.5}\right)^{2}\,.
(4)
where
σ
total
\displaystyle\sigma_{\text{total}}
=
total noise (in electrons)
\displaystyle=\text{total noise (in electrons)}
S
\displaystyle S
=
signal electrons (shot noise is
​
S
​
electrons)
\displaystyle=\text{signal electrons (shot noise is }\sqrt{S}\text{ electrons)}
Sky
=
sky background count (in electrons/pixel
2
)
\displaystyle=\text{sky background count (in electrons/pixel}^{2})
D
\displaystyle D
=
dark current (in electrons/pixel
2
/second
)
\displaystyle=\text{dark current (in electrons/pixel}^{2}\text{/second})
t
\displaystyle t
=
exposure time (in seconds)
\displaystyle=\text{exposure time (in seconds)}
σ
read
\displaystyle\sigma_{\text{read}}
=
readout noise (in electrons/pixel
)
\displaystyle=\text{readout noise (in electrons/pixel})
N
eff
\displaystyle N_{\text{eff}}
=
PSF Effective Area (pixel
2
)
\displaystyle=\text{PSF Effective Area (pixel}^{2})
zp_mag
=
Zeropoint (magnitude corresponding to 1 electron)
\displaystyle=\text{Zeropoint (magnitude corresponding to 1 electron)}
σ
zp_mag
\displaystyle\sigma_{\texttt{zp\_mag}}
=
Zeropoint error (mag)
\displaystyle=\text{Zeropoint error (mag)}
For ZTF, the CCD characterizations (i.e.
D
D
,
σ
read
\sigma_{\text{read}}
) are obtained from Table 3 in
R. G. Dekany et al. (
2020
)
.
Some values are converted to electrons using
CCD gain
=
6.2
​
e
−
\text{CCD gain}=6.2e^{-}
.
N
eff
N_{\text{eff}}
is calculated from the PSF’s Full width at half maximum (FWHM) assuming Gaussian PSF.
For our simulations generated, we set
σ
zp_mag
=
0
\sigma_{\texttt{zp\_mag}}=0
.
III.7
Selection Effects
After the simulation is generated, we apply selection effects to obtain a sample consistent with the data selection criteria.
We included detection cuts, spectroscopic follow-up efficiency, and light curve quality cuts.
Detection
We define detection as an observation with signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) greater than 5 and require at least one detection for the simulated light curve to be included in the final sample.
Spectroscopic efficiency
Since ZTFSNDR2 is a spectroscopically confirmed sample, we apply the same spectroscopic efficiency as used in
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
.
The spectroscopic efficiency curve is modeled as a survival sigmoid
1
−
𝒮
​
(
m
;
m
0
,
s
)
=
1
−
(
1
+
e
s
​
(
m
−
m
0
)
)
−
1
,
1-\mathcal{S}(m;m_{0},s)=1-\left(1+e^{s(m-m_{0})}\right)^{-1},
(5)
where
m
0
=
18.8
,
s
=
4.5
m_{0}=18.8,\;s=4.5
.
This curve matches the spectral completeness curve for the ZTF Bright Transient Survey (BTS,
D. A. Perley et al.
2020
).
Light curve quality cuts
We apply the same light curve quality cuts following
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
, which requires detections at 7 different phases, at least 2 detections before and 2 detections after the peak magnitude, and detections in at least two different bands within the phase range of [-10, 40] days.
However, for simplicity, we do not fit the light curve to determine the time of peak, instead using the time of the maximum flux as an approximation.
Modeling selection effects in parameter models
In order to account for selection effect in the input parameter models for the SALT parameters
x
1
x_{1}
and c, and the host galaxy stellar mass, the following steps are performed.
1.
Generate simulations with flat distributions of the SN parameters
x
1
x_{1}
and
c
c
.
2.
Apply selection cuts as described in Section
III.7
.
3.
Compute and fit for the selection functions for
x
1
x_{1}
and
c
c
separately.
We fit the discrete selection function with an exponential function,
y
=
a
​
e
b
​
x
+
c
y=ae^{bx}+c
, to obtain a smooth selection function.
For
x
1
x_{1}
, we require
a
>
0
a>0
and
b
>
0
b>0
so the selection function follows the broader-brighter relation (more objects with larger
x
1
x_{1}
values will be selected due to their brightness being higher;
M. M. Phillips
1993
; R. Tripp
1998
).
For
c
c
, we require
a
>
0
a>0
and
b
<
0
b<0
, following the bluer-brighter relation (more objects with smaller
c
c
values will be selected due to their brightness being higher;
A. G. Riess et al.
1996
; R. Tripp
1998
).
4.
Train a
PZFlow
model with existing
x
1
x_{1}
,
c
c
data to obtain distributions after selection.
5.
Inverse-apply selection function to obtain the
x
1
x_{1}
,
c
c
distribution before selection.
(Note that the SALT3 parameters
x
1
x_{1}
and
c
c
are orthogonal by design, so we apply selection functions separately and ignore the covariance between them.
Alternatively, a joint selection function for a set of parameters can be estimated using similar approaches.)
6.
Draw samples from the new
x
1
x_{1}
,
c
c
distribution and train another
PZFlow
model on host mass conditioned on
x
1
x_{1}
,
c
c
.
These steps are demonstrated in a publicly available Jupyter notebook
6
6
6
https://github.com/mi-dai/lightcurvelynx_ztf_sims/blob/main/train_pzflow.ipynb
.
The derived selection functions for
x
1
x_{1}
and
c
c
, together with the recalculated ones using simulation, are shown in Figure
2
.
Figure 2
:
The selection functions for the SN Ia light curve parameters
x
1
x_{1}
and
c
c
.
Solid orange lines represent the selection functions derived following the procedure in Section
III.1.3
;
blue dots represent the recovered selection function from the simulations.
The selection functions are re-scaled so that the relative selection ratio is 1 when
x
1
x_{1}
and
c
c
are zero.
III.8
Light Curve Fitting
For validation purposes, we fit the simulated light curves using
SNCosmo
and compare the fitted values to the simulated values.
The light curve fitting is only performed on the sample after light curve quality cuts. The same SALT3 model for simulation is used for light curve fitting. We limit the rest frame phase range [-10, 40] days, following
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
. The bounds for
x
1
x_{1}
and
c
c
parameters are set as [-5, 5] and [-0.4, 1], respectively. The best-fit parameters all agree with the simulated parameters within the uncertainties.
IV
Results
We present our results in three areas: comparisons between the simulation and data, the recovered Hubble diagram, and simulation performance.
IV.1
Data and Simulation Comparisons
We show comparisons between the data and simulation in terms of individual light curves, sample statistics, parameter distributions, and noise properties.
IV.1.1
An Example Light Curve
Before comparing the full sample, we first simulate a random SN in the ZTFSNDR2 sample using its location and best-fit SALT parameters, and then compare with the data.
We query the observing log and match the exact CCD quadrant as listed in the data to avoid introducing any discrepancy due to variations in the CCDs.
Figure
3
shows a comparison between a real ZTFSNDR2 light curve (SN2020zko) and 100 realizations of simulated light curves using the same set of light curve parameters.
The simulated flux values appear consistent with the data, with the median value of the simulation to data flux ratios being 0.989.
For this example SN, the median values of the simulation to data flux error ratios are 0.766, and the median values of the simulation to data SNR ratios, as shown in Figure
3
, is 1.295.
The values indicate that the flux errors of this SN is underestimated by
∼
23
%
\sim 23\%
.
This is consistent with our assumptions, since we infer the sky background from the published 5
σ
\sigma
limiting magnitude from the science images (see Appendix
A
).
While actual light curves are obtained by performing forced photometry on difference images, and we do not include the error contribution from the template images, the underestimation in the flux errors is expected.
In a similar effort,
M. Amenouche et al. (
2025
)
also found that the flux errors are underestimated when estimating the sky noise using the magnitude limit from the science image, and applied a per-band correction factor to the simulated flux errors to resolve the discrepancies between simulation and data.
The correction factors are 1.23, 1.17 and 1.20 for g, r and i bands respectively, which is consistent with the level of underestimation we see in this SN.
We further simulated the full ZTFSNDR2 sample and found the median of the simulation to data SNR ratio (
SNR
sim
/
SNR
data
\textrm{SNR}_{\textrm{sim}}/\textrm{SNR}_{\textrm{data}}
) is 1.12.
Future investigations will be needed to understand the exact source of the error underestimation, which is beyond the scope of this paper.
While the exact precision requirements for simulations are likely dependent on the specific science cases,
LightCurveLynx
can be extended to include more complex error simulations (e.g. adding the template contributions from the difference image analyses, or modeling host galaxy residuals from subtraction).
A correction factor as in
M. Amenouche et al. (
2025
)
can also be applied using
LightCurveLynx
to resolve the simulation and data discrepancy if the source of the discrepancy is beyond the scope of the analysis.
Figure 3
:
Top panel:
An example of a simulated light curve of a randomly selected real ZTFSNDR2 object.
The solid dots are the ZTFSNDR2 data for this object, the transparent points show 100 realizations of the simulated light curves using the same set of best-fit light curve parameters for this object.
The spread in the points represents random realizations of the simulated band fluxes from the same Gaussian errors.
Bottom panel:
The ratio of the SNR between the simulations and the ZTFSNDR2 data.
IV.1.2
Sample Statistics
We show in Table
2
the total number of SNe simulated and passed each selection criteria, with a comparison to
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
.
The total sample size in our simulation is about
20
%
20\%
larger compared to the ZTFSNDR2 data.
This may be due to the uncertainty in the volumetric rate estimation, or the slightly underestimated flux errors which will make more SNe passing the selection cuts, or a slightly different total survey area (we used the observing log to estimate the total sky coverage, however, the observing log may include fields that are not part of the science area).
We do not include host galaxy light profile or dust properties in the simulation, which may also result in a larger sample number, since some of the SNe may not be detectable due to these effects. The percentages passing each cut are similar between the simulation and data.
We further compare sample statistics on number of observations, number of detections, and median cadences of each filter in Table
3
.
For the simulation, we compute the numbers using the sample that pass the spectroscopic selection cuts.
This sample should have similar statistics with the full ZTFSNDR2 data.
The observing log from
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
includes observations from June 19, 2018 to Feb 28, 2021, while the actual light curves appear to have additional data points outside of this range.
For comparison, we cut the ZTFSNDR2 data to include the same range as the observing log covers.
We also apply cuts to exclude observations that have unphysical errors, are extreme outliers, have a cloudy flag, or have infobits
>
0
>0
based on the
flag
column in the ZTFSNDR2 data.
Our results show that all listed metrics are comparable between the simulation and data, while the simulation generally has slightly larger numbers of observations and detections per object, possibly due to our neglect of CCD gaps.
We calculate the median cadence by taking the difference of the MJDs in each object, finding the median cadence of each object, and report the median value of the median cadences.
We do the same for the subset that contains only detections.
The median cadences for the g and r bands are nearly identical between simulation and data, while those for the i band show slightly larger differences. The i-band discrepancy may be an artifact of how the median cadence is calculated, as cadences are clustered in discrete numbers of days.
To separate out the effect that our light curve extrapolation may not be accurate enough to produce the same statistics for epochs out of the defined SALT range, we also show the number of detections within the rest frame phase range (-20, 50) days.
The resulting numbers are closer for the two samples, but the ZTFSNDR2 sample have a slightly larger number of detections (in g and r) within the selected phase range.
Cuts
Simulation
ZTFSNDR2
Number
%
Number
%
All simulated
84,687
100.0
–
–
After applying detection
43,303
51.13
–
–
After spectroscopic selection
4,313
5.09 (100.0)
3,628
100.0 (100.0)
After quality cuts
3,346
3.95 (77.6)
2,960
81.6 (81.6)
x
1
>
−
3
x_{1}>-3
&
x
1
<
3
x_{1}<3
3,224
3.81 (74.8)
2,899
79.9 (79.9)
c
>
−
0.2
>-0.2
& c
<
0.8
<0.8
3,159
3.73 (73.2)
2,861
78.9 (78.9)
σ
t
0
<
1
\sigma_{t_{0}}<1
3,062
3.62 (71.0)
2,836
78.2 (78.2)
σ
x
1
<
1
\sigma_{x_{1}}<1
3,031
3.58 (70.3)
2,822
77.8 (77.8)
σ
c
<
0.1
\sigma_{c}<0.1
3,010
3.55 (69.8)
2,809
77.4 (77.4)
fitprob
>
10
−
7
>10^{-7}
2,992
3.53 (69.4)
2,667
73.5 (73.5)
Table 2
:
Comparison of the simulation and ZTFSNDR2 after successive selection cuts.
Percentages in parentheses are relative to the spectroscopic-selected sample.
Filter
Sample
𝐍
𝐞𝐯𝐞𝐧𝐭
\mathbf{N_{event}}
𝐍
𝐨𝐛𝐬
\mathbf{N_{obs}}
𝐍
𝐝𝐞𝐭
\mathbf{N_{det}}
𝐍
𝐝𝐞𝐭
,
𝐰𝐢𝐧
\mathbf{N_{det,win}}
⟨
𝐍
𝐨𝐛𝐬
⟩
\mathbf{\langle N_{obs}\rangle}
⟨
𝐍
𝐝𝐞𝐭
⟩
\mathbf{\langle N_{det}\rangle}
⟨
𝐍
𝐝𝐞𝐭
,
𝐰𝐢𝐧
⟩
\mathbf{\langle N_{det,win}\rangle}
Median cadence
Median cadence det.
g
Simulation
4313
1,588,686
115,106
94,609
368.35
26.69
21.94
1.03
2.00
ZTFSNDR2
3592
1,267,460
102,326
84,162
352.86
28.49
23.43
1.03
1.99
r
Simulation
4313
2,159,803
213,619
152,888
500.77
49.53
35.45
0.95
1.04
ZTFSNDR2
3592
1,649,064
162,671
132,487
459.09
45.29
36.88
0.96
1.08
i
Simulation
4313
306,993
26,289
19,800
71.18
6.10
4.59
3.09
4.00
ZTFSNDR2
3592
224,896
17,786
15,558
62.61
4.95
4.33
3.99
4.57
Table 3
:
Sample statistics for the simulation and ZTFSNDR2.
IV.1.3
Parameter Distributions
In this section, we compare distributions of several simulated parameters to the ZTFSNDR2 sample.
The full ZTFSNDR2 sample is presented before the light curve quality cuts, and includes both detections and forced photometry of the detected objects.
For the simulation, we apply detection criteria, spectroscopic efficiency, and light curve quality cuts (as described in
III.7
), with flags saved to filter out or include them in the comparison accordingly.
The ZTF sample also includes flags that can filter out objects that do not pass light curve quality or SALT parameter cuts.
Redshift distribution
We first show the redshift distribution in Figure
4
.
Both the simulation and ZTFSNDR2 in the figure include only SNe that pass the light curve quality cuts.
We fit both distributions to a skewed normal distribution,
p
​
(
x
)
=
2
ω
​
2
​
π
​
e
−
(
x
−
ξ
)
2
2
​
ω
2
​
∫
−
∞
κ
​
(
x
−
ξ
ω
)
1
2
​
π
​
e
−
t
2
2
​
𝑑
t
p(x)=\frac{2}{\omega\sqrt{2\pi}}e^{-\frac{(x-\xi)^{2}}{2\omega^{2}}}\int_{-\infty}^{\kappa\left(\frac{x-\xi}{\omega}\right)}\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi}}e^{-\frac{t^{2}}{2}}\,dt
(6)
and report the best-fit parameters in the figure.
Overall, the best-fit parameters agree well with each other (with
Δ
​
ξ
=
−
0.0001
±
0.0015
\Delta\xi=-0.0001\pm 0.0015
,
Δ
​
ω
=
0.0007
±
0.0016
\Delta\omega=0.0007\pm 0.0016
,
and
Δ
​
κ
=
0.11
±
0.25
\Delta\kappa=0.11\pm 0.25
).
We also computed the Kullback-Leibler Divergence (KLD) from the simulated distributions to the ZTFSNDR2 distributions
D
KL
​
(
p
data
∥
p
sim
)
D_{\mathrm{KL}}(p_{\rm data}\|p_{\rm sim})
.
7
7
7
The Kullback-Leibler divergence
D
KL
(
P
|
|
Q
)
=
∑
i
P
(
i
)
log
P
​
(
i
)
Q
​
(
i
)
D_{\mathrm{KL}}(P||Q)=\sum_{i}P(i)\log\frac{P(i)}{Q(i)}
quantifies the information loss when the distribution Q is used to approximate the reference distribution P. Note that the KLD is asymmetric;
D
KL
​
(
P
∥
Q
)
≠
D
KL
​
(
Q
∥
P
)
D_{\mathrm{KL}}(P\|Q)\neq D_{\mathrm{KL}}(Q\|P)
.
The KLD value is 0.02, indicating good agreement.
The ZTFSNDR2 data shows some fluctuations around z=0.05, likely due to statistical fluctuations or unknown systematic effects that are not modeled in the simulation.
Figure 4
:
The redshift distributions of the simulation (blue histogram) and ZTFSNDR2 (orange histogram).
Both samples are after light curve quality cuts described in Section
III.7
.
The dashed lines show the best-fit skewed-normal distribution (Eq.
6
).
The ZTFSNDR2 shows some deviations from the skewed-normal distribution, which is likely due to statistical fluctuations and/or unknown systematics.
Overall, the two distributions agree well with each other (with KLD=0.02).
SALT parameter distributions
We compare the fitted
x
1
x_{1}
and
c
c
distributions with ZTFSNDR2 in Figure
5(a)
and
5(b)
.
Since the light curve fitting results are meaningful only if the light curves pass both the light curve quality cuts and the light curve fitting cuts, we include here the simulation that pass the light curve quality cuts and a series of light curve fitting cuts (Table
2
), and filter the ZTF results for SNe that pass the same cuts.
We have also confirmed that the fitted light curve parameters are consistent with the simulated values.
Our simulation produces similar distribution as we see in the data.
We fit both the simulated and data distributions with a Gaussian Mixture model and report the best-fit values in the figures.
The KLD values for
x
1
x_{1}
and
c
c
are 0.01 and 0.02, respectively.
(a)
The
x
1
x_{1}
distributions.
(b)
The
c
c
distributions.
Figure 5
:
Comparison of the SALT parameters
x
1
x_{1}
and
c
c
distributions for the simulation and ZTFSNDR2 after light curve quality and light curve fitting cuts.
For both plots the blue histograms are the
x
1
x_{1}
(a)/
c
c
(b) parameter distributions of the simulated values, and the orange histograms are the
x
1
x_{1}
(a)/
c
c
(b) parameter distributions of the ZTFSNDR2 values.
The dashed lines show the best-fit Gaussian Mixture models with 2 components for the simulations (blue) and ZTFSNDR2 (orange) respectively.
The simulated distributions agree well with the ZTFSNDR2 distributions (with KLD[
x
1
x_{1}
]=0.013, and KLD[
c
c
]=0.025.)
Host mass distribution and
host mass
−
x
1
\textrm{host mass}-x_{1}
relation
Here we test our data-driven approach for generating relations between SN host mass and the
x
1
x_{1}
parameter.
The relation between host mass and
x
1
x_{1}
has been reported in previous studies
(M. Sullivan et al.,
2010
; J. Johansson et al.,
2013
; M. Ginolin et al.,
2025
)
.
We show that our approach in Section
III.1.3
produces similar host mass distributions and similar host mass -
x
1
x_{1}
relation (Figure
6
) compared to the data.
The light curve fitting cuts are applied to both the simulation and the data to obtain a well-constrained surface.
Figure 6
:
SALT
x
1
x_{1}
parameter vs host galaxy stellar mass.
Main (Bottom) panel:
Solid lines show the density contours of the Host Mass -
x
1
x_{1}
space, estimated using Kernel Density Estimation (KDE);
dashed lines show the best fit Gaussian Mixture model contours.
Blue lines represent the simulation;
orange lines represent ZTFSNDR2.
Scatter plot of individual Host Mass -
x
1
x_{1}
pairs are shown in transparent dots.
Top panel:
the host galaxy mass distribution for the simulation (blue) and ZTFSNDR2 (orange).
Following the data-driven approach in Section
III.1.3
, the simulation closely resembles the ZTFSNDR2 data.
IV.1.4
Noise Properties
Our noise model is described in Section
III.6
.
We focus on comparing two properties:
the signal-to-noise ratio and the flux and flux error contours.
Signal-to-noise ratio
We compare the signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) distributions for all observations for the spectroscopic sample, and for detections only, shown in Figure
7(a)
and
7(b)
.
For both observations and detections, the SNR distributions are closely aligned except for the high SNR tails.
The maximum SNR in the simulation is around 1000, which roughly equals to a nominal SNR at
∼
13
\sim 13
mag.
The ZTFSNDR2 data contain a small fraction of observations with SNR
>
1000
>1000
, which may be the effects of very bright objects or extreme observing conditions in the image that are not modeled in our simulation.
Flux vs flux error contours
We compare the flux vs flux error contours for all detections in Figure
8(a)
, and the maximum flux - flux error contours at the maximum fluxes in Figure
8(b)
.
In Fig
8(a)
, both the fluxes and flux errors have slightly higher fractions of low values, which leads to a larger tail in the bottom-left corner of the plot.
In Fig
8(b)
, we observe that the flux distribution at the epoch of the maximum flux are shifted slightly toward the lower flux value side compared to the data, while the flux error distribution at the same epoch are shifted slightly to the higher flux error side.
The small differences may be due to the light curve model not fully representing the data, and/or as we have discussed in Section
III.2
, the uncertainty in the error estimation.
Overall, these distributions and contours are very similar.
(a)
SNR distributions for all the observations in the simulation (blue) and ZTFSNDR2 (orange).
The y-axis shows normalized number density in log scale.
The simulated distribution matched ZTFSNDR2 for SNR up to
∼
\sim
1000.
The simulation does not produce SNR
>
1000
>1000
as seen in the ZTFSNDR2 data.
This is likely due to contributions from very bright objects (beyond nominal SN brightness), or under extreme observing conditions, that are not included as part of the simulation.
(b)
SNR distributions for all the detections (SNR
>
5
>5
) in the simulation (blue) and ZTFSNDR2 (orange).
The y-axis shows normalized number density in log scale.
The simulated distribution matched ZTFSNDR2 for SNR up to
∼
\sim
400.
Same as in Fig
7(a)
, the simulation does not produce objects with SNR
>
1000
>1000
seen in the ZTFSNDR2 data.
Figure 7
:
Signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) comparisons between the simulation and ZTFSNDR2.
(a)
Flux and flux error contours for simulation (blue) and ZTFSNDR2 (orange).
The contours are fractions of counts (counts/total counts) in each log bin at the level of
10
−
1.5
10^{-1.5}
,
10
−
2
10^{-2}
,
10
−
2.5
10^{-2.5}
,
10
−
3
10^{-3}
,
10
−
3.5
10^{-3.5}
,
10
−
4
10^{-4}
,
10
−
4.5
10^{-4.5}
and
10
−
5
10^{-5}
from the innermost to the outermost;
the contours are smoothed using a Gaussian kernel with sigma=1.
The histograms on the top and right are also fractions of the flux, and the flux error, respectively.
The simulation produced similar contours to the ZTFSNDR2 data, with slightly larger fractions of low flux and low flux errors.
(b)
Flux and flux error contours at the maximum flux for simulation (blue) and ZTFSNDR2 (orange).
The contours are fractions of counts (counts/total counts) in each log bin at the level of
10
−
1.5
10^{-1.5}
,
10
−
2
10^{-2}
,
10
−
2.5
10^{-2.5}
,
10
−
3
10^{-3}
and
10
−
3.5
10^{-3.5}
from the innermost to the outermost;
the contours are smoothed using a Gaussian kernel with sigma=1.
The histograms on the top and right are also fractions of the flux, and the flux error at the maximum flux, respectively.
The simulation produced similar contours to the ZTFSNDR2 data.
Figure 8
:
Flux and flux error contours for all detections (a), and all detections at the maximum flux of each SN (b).
IV.2
Hubble Diagram
We compute the distance moduli using the Tripp formula (Eq.
2
) and the cosmological parameters used for simulations.
The Hubble diagram is shown in Figure
9
.
Without applying any bias correction term, we find that the Hubble residuals (
μ
−
μ
Λ
​
CDM
\mu-\mu_{{\Lambda}\textrm{CDM}}
) are biased toward negative values starting around
z
=
0.06
z=0.06
.
This is consistent with the results in
M. Amenouche et al. (
2025
)
, which claims the sample is free from selection bias up to
z
=
0.06
z=0.06
.
The RMS of the Hubble residuals is 0.18, which is consistent with both the data and the input scatter that we used for simulation.
Figure 9
:
The Hubble Diagram from the simulated sample.
Upper panel:
Hubble diagram of 2992 simulated SN Ia that passed the selection and quality cuts defined in Table
2
.
The blue points are the distance modulus of each individual SN (Eq.
2
);
the orange curve is the distance modulus calculated using
Λ
​
C
​
D
​
M
\Lambda CDM
cosmology.
Lower panel:
The Hubble residuals (HR
=
μ
−
μ
Λ
​
CDM
=\mu-\mu_{\rm\Lambda CDM}
) as a function of redshift.
Blue points are the HR of each individual SN;
orange points represent means and errors on the means of the binned Hubble residuals in 15 redshift bins.
No bias corrections are accounted for when computing the distance modulus.
As expected, we observe a selection bias in HR starting at
z
∼
0.06
.
z\sim 0.06.
Although we did not simulate any relations between the Hubble residuals and the host galaxy mass (for example, a mass step), we would like to check if any systematics arise which may be due to imperfect linear corrections for the
x
1
x_{1}
or
c
c
parameters.
We show in Fig.
10
the binned Hubble residuals for the volume-limited (
z
<
0.06
z<0.06
) sample.
The binned Hubble residuals are consistent with 0 in most of the bins, indicating no significant systematics.
There are slight deviations in regions where
x
1
>
2
x_{1}>2
and
c
>
0.5
c>0.5
, which may require future investigation.
Figure 10
:
Binned Hubble residuals against host galaxy mass, and light curve parameters
x
1
x_{1}
and
c
c
for a sample with
z
<
0.06
z<0.06
.
No significant bias is present in any of these parameter spaces.
IV.3
Simulation Performance
The simulation is generated on a Macbook Pro with an Apple M1 Max chip (10-core CPU, 32-core GPU) with 64 GB of memory.
We generated a total of 84,688 SNe with 75,365,656 observations.
The average SN generation rate is
∼
100
\sim 100
SN per second, about 10 ms per SN.
Utilizing
LightCurveLynx
’s built-in parallelization features and using 8 jobs and a batch size of 5000, the total CPU time is
∼
26.4
\sim 26.4
s, plus
∼
4.5
\sim 4.5
minutes startup overhead.
The observing log contains 522,192 rows and 24 columns;
the load-in time is
∼
500
\sim 500
ms.
V
Discussions and Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce
LightCurveLynx
, a Python-based software framework for forward modeling transient and variable light curves with realistic observing conditions and uncertainties.
LightCurveLynx
provides a flexible, user-friendly, and extensible framework that meets the growing needs of the time-domain astronomy community in the era of large and deep surveys such as LSST and Roman.
We demonstrate the functionalities and validate the credibility of
LightCurveLynx
through a use case of simulating a realistic SN Ia sample as observed by ZTF.
We show that users have the flexibility to define a set of input parameters and their distributions, and generate simulations directly from an observing log (typically provided by the survey).
For SN Ia, we generate the simulation using a realistic SN Ia SED model, volumetric rate and luminosity function.
We model the SN Ia light curve parameter distribution, the host galaxy stellar mass distribution and selection functions using a data-driven approach.
We use realistic detector characterizations and the publicly-available observing log to generate realistic cadence and noise.
We compare our simulation to the ZTFSNDR2 data release.
The resulting redshift distribution, SN Ia light curve parameter distributions, host galaxy mass distribution all match the data very well.
We also demonstrated that we can model joint parameter distributions using a data-driven approach utilizing
PZFlow
.
The sample statistics in our simulation match the data at various stages of the analyses (e.g, applying a spectroscopic efficiency, applying data quality cuts and light curve fitting quality cuts.)
The use of
SNCosmo
and
PZFlow
in our simulation demonstrates how the modular structure of
LightCurveLynx
allows users to easily incorporate community packages into the simulation flow to make use of previously implemented models and modeling frameworks.
Finally we show that we reproduce similar statistics in the Hubble diagram and confirmed the sample completeness up to
z
=
0.06
z=0.06
, consistent with
M. Amenouche et al. (
2025
)
.
Since we simulate an existing survey, an accurate and detailed observing log that contains necessary information such as zero points, seeing, sky background/sky noise, and accurate instrument characterizations are the key to reproducing realistic cadence and uncertainties.
We encourage survey operators to make such information available with detailed documentation to support future analyses and forecasting.
This paper also serves a working example of how to build a simulation pipeline from scratch.
Users can build their own simulation pipeline by adding and/or replacing parameter models, physical models, observational effects, survey data, etc.
With detailed and realistic simulations of SN Ia like this, we can test assumptions such as dependency on host galaxy properties, effect of parameter evolutions over redshift, or biases in various analysis stages, for example.
Our efficient simulation strategy utilizing parallel computing makes it natural to explore more computational extensive approaches such as simulation-based inference, which is left for future studies.
We confirm that
LightCurveLynx
is ready to be used by the community, and we encourage community feedback and contributions moving forward.
We describe the caveats in calculating sky background in Appendix
A
.
Appendix A
Caveats about Sky Background
The sky background is needed to simulate realistic noises. While we intended to utilize public information regarding sky background from the metadata DB,
the values provided in the metadata DB do not seem to represent the actual sky background in the images;
they are instead a “robust estimate of background level in scaled science image,” (possibly as a result of rescaling the science image to the reference image).
In order to obtain a representative sky background for realistic noise estimation, we derived the sky background utilizing existing information using Eq. (
3
), assuming that the 5
σ
\sigma
magnitude limit is the magnitude at which
flux
/
flux error
=
5
\texttt{flux}/\texttt{flux error}=5
.
Note that there are two limiting magnitude columns in the observing log, provided by both
M. Rigault et al. (
2025
)
and the metadata DB.
We noticed these two columns are not identical;
the
maglimit
column in the observing log is described as the 5
σ
\sigma
limiting magnitudes of the science images, while the
maglim
column in the metadata DB is described as the “Median of IMQA Records of Magnitude limit of PSF-fit catalog based on semi-empirical formula [mag].”
We experiment using both columns to derive different sky background values and generated simulations, respectively.
Interestingly, when comparing the simulation and the corresponding ZTFSNDR2 data, we find that using the observing log value leads to underestimating the flux errors by 12%, while using the metadata DB values leads to overestimating the flux errors by 19%.
In a similar effort,
M. Amenouche et al. (
2025
)
compared the simulated errors in two simulations:
one used a sky noise value derived from the limiting mag from the science images and the other used that derived from the difference images.
They concluded that the science image values generate underestimated errors that are nonetheless closer to those reported in the data and that the difference image mag limit is not correctly estimated.
While we do not have easy access to the difference image limits, as they are not included in the ZTFSNDR2 data release, the underestimation we observe when using the science image limits is consistent with what is found in
M. Amenouche et al. (
2025
)
.
We choose to use the 5
σ
\sigma
magnitude limit published by the ZTFSNDR2 data for the results of this paper.
LINCC Frameworks is supported by Schmidt Sciences. A.C. acknowledges support from the DiRAC Institute in the Department of Astronomy at the University of Washington. The DiRAC Institute is supported through generous gifts from the Charles and Lisa Simonyi Fund for Arts and Sciences, and the Washington Research Foundation. This work made use of
Claude (Anthropic)
and
ChatGPT (OpenAI)
for partial editing of the manuscript text.
References
M. Amenouche et al. (2025)
Amenouche, M., Smith, M., Rosnet, P., et al. 2025, ZTF SN Ia DR2: Simulations and volume-limited sample, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 694, A3, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202452134
Astropy Collaboration et al. (2013)
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, Astropy: A community Python package for astronomy, A&A, 558, A33, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201322068
Astropy Collaboration et al. (2018)
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sipőcz, B. M., et al. 2018, The Astropy Project: Building an Open-science Project and Status of the v2.0 Core Package, AJ, 156, 123, doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f
Astropy Collaboration et al. (2022)
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Lim, P. L., et al. 2022, The Astropy Project: Sustaining and Growing a Community-oriented Open-source Project and the Latest Major Release (v5.0) of the Core Package, ApJ, 935, 167, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ac7c74
K. Barbary & AmpelAstro (2023)
Barbary, K., & AmpelAstro. 2023, sfdmap2: E(B-V) values from SFD dust map data,, 0.2.2
https://github.com/AmpelAstro/sfdmap2
K. Barbary et al. (2016)
Barbary, K., Bailey, S., Barentsen, G., et al. 2016, SNCosmo: Python library for supernova cosmology, doi:
10.5281/zenodo.592747
K. Barbary et al. (2025)
Barbary, K., Bailey, S., Barentsen, G., et al. 2025, SNCosmo,, v2.12.1 Zenodo, doi:
10.5281/zenodo.15019859
E. C. Bellm et al. (2019)
Bellm, E. C., Kulkarni, S. R., Graham, M. J., et al. 2019, The Zwicky Transient Facility: System Overview, Performance, and First Results, Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 131, 018002, doi:
10.1088/1538-3873/aaecbe
B. M. Boyd et al. (2024)
Boyd, B. M., Grayling, M., Thorp, S., & Mandel, K. S. 2024, Accounting for Selection Effects in Supernova Cosmology with Simulation-Based Inference and Hierarchical Bayesian Modelling, arXiv preprint.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.15923
J. F. Crenshaw et al. (2024)
Crenshaw, J. F., Kalmbach, J. B., Gagliano, A., et al. 2024, Probabilistic Forward Modeling of Galaxy Catalogs with Normalizing Flows, The Astronomical Journal, 168, 80, doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/ad54bf
R. G. Dekany et al. (2020)
Dekany, R. G., Smith, R. M., Riddle, R., et al. 2020, The Zwicky Transient Facility: Observing System, Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 132, 038001, doi:
10.1088/1538-3873/ab4ca2
B. Dilday et al. (2010)
Dilday, B., Smith, M., Bassett, B., et al. 2010, Measurements of the Rate of Type Ia Supernovae at Redshift lsim0.3 from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey II Supernova Survey, ApJ, 713, 1026, doi:
10.1088/0004-637X/713/2/1026
ELAsTiCC Team (in prep)
ELAsTiCC Team. in prep, ELAsTiCC,
E. L. Fitzpatrick (1999)
Fitzpatrick, E. L. 1999, Correcting for the Effects of Interstellar Extinction, PASP, 111, 63, doi:
10.1086/316293
C. Frohmaier et al. (2019)
Frohmaier, C., Sullivan, M., Nugent, P. E., et al. 2019, The volumetric rate of normal type Ia supernovae in the local Universe discovered by the Palomar Transient Factory, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 486, 2308, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stz807
A. Gagliano et al. (2021)
Gagliano, A., Narayan, G., Engel, A., Carrasco Kind, M., & LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration. 2021, GHOST: Using Only Host Galaxy Information to Accurately Associate and Distinguish Supernovae, ApJ, 908, 170, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/abd02b
M. Ginolin et al. (2025)
Ginolin, M., Rigault, M., Copin, Y., et al. 2025, ZTF SN Ia DR2: Colour standardisation of type Ia supernovae and its dependence on the environment, A&A, 694, A4, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202450943
K. D. Gordon (2024)
Gordon, K. D. 2024, dust_extinction: Interstellar Dust Extinction Models, Journal of Open Source Software, 9, 7023, doi:
10.21105/joss.07023
P. Gris et al. (2024)
Gris, P., Awan, H., Becker, M. R., et al. 2024, A Cohesive Deep Drilling Field Strategy for LSST Cosmology, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 275, 21, doi:
10.3847/1538-4365/ad79f5
R. R. Gupta et al. (2016)
Gupta, R. R., Kuhlmann, S., Kovacs, E., et al. 2016, Host Galaxy Identification for Supernova Surveys, The Astronomical Journal, 152, 154, doi:
10.3847/0004-6256/152/6/154
J. Guy et al. (2007)
Guy, J., Astier, P., Baumont, S., et al. 2007, SALT2: using distant supernovae to improve the use of Type Ia supernovae as distance indicators, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 466, 11, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361:20066930
J. Guy et al. (2010)
Guy, J., Sullivan, M., Conley, A., et al. 2010, The Supernova Legacy Survey 3-year sample: Type Ia Supernovae photometric distances and cosmological constraints, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 523, A7, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201014468
C. R. Harris et al. (2020)
Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al. 2020, Array programming with NumPy, Nature, 585, 357, doi:
10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2
R. Hlozek et al. (2023)
Hlozek, R., Malz, A. I., Ponder, K. A., et al. 2023, Results of the Photometric LSST Astronomical Time-series Classification Challenge (PLAsTiCC), The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 267, 25, doi:
10.3847/1538-4365/accd6a
J. D. Hunter (2007)
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment, Computing in Science & Engineering, 9, 90, doi:
10.1109/MCSE.2007.55
Ž. Ivezić et al. (2019)
Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., et al. 2019, LSST: From Science Drivers to Reference Design and Anticipated Data Products, The Astrophysical Journal, 873, 111, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ab042c
E. Jennings et al. (2016)
Jennings, E., Wolf, R., & Sako, M. 2016, A new approach for obtaining cosmological constraints from Type Ia Supernovae using Approximate Bayesian Computation, arXiv preprint.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.03087
J. Johansson et al. (2013)
Johansson, J., Thomas, D., Pforr, J., et al. 2013, SN Ia host galaxy properties from Sloan Digital Sky Survey-II spectroscopy, MNRAS, 435, 1680, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stt1408
W. D. Kenworthy et al. (2021)
Kenworthy, W. D., Jones, D. O., Dai, M., et al. 2021, SALT3: An Improved Type Ia Supernova Model for Measuring Cosmic Distances, The Astrophysical Journal, 923, 265, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ac30d8
R. Kessler & D. Scolnic (2017)
Kessler, R., & Scolnic, D. 2017, Correcting Type Ia Supernova Distances for Selection Biases and Contamination in Photometrically Identified Samples, The Astrophysical Journal, 836, 56, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/836/1/56
R. Kessler et al. (2009)
Kessler, R., Bernstein, J. P., Cinabro, D., et al. 2009, SNANA: A Public Software Package for Supernova Analysis, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 185, 32, doi:
10.1088/0067-0049/185/1/32
R. Kessler et al. (2010)
Kessler, R., Bassett, B. A., Belov, P., et al. 2010, Results from the Supernova Photometric Classification Challenge, Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 122, 1415, doi:
10.1086/657607
R. Kessler et al. (2019)
Kessler, R., Narayan, G., Avelino, A., et al. 2019, Models and Simulations for the Photometric LSST Astronomical Time Series Classification Challenge (PLAsTiCC), Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 131, 094501, doi:
10.1088/1538-3873/ab26f1
J. Kubica et al. (in prep)
Kubica et al., J. in prep, LightCurveLynx,
LINCC Frameworks (2025)
LINCC Frameworks. 2025, nested-pandas: Efficient Pandas Representation for Nested Associated Datasets,, 0.6.8
https://github.com/lincc-frameworks/nested-pandas
M. Lochner et al. (2018)
Lochner, M., Scolnic, D., Awan, H., et al. 2018, Optimizing the LSST Observing Strategy for Dark Energy Science: DESC Recommendations for the Wide–Fast–Deep Survey, arXiv preprint
M. Lokken et al. (2023)
Lokken, M., Gagliano, A., Narayan, G., et al. 2023, The simulated catalogue of optical transients and correlated hosts (SCOTCH), MNRAS, 520, 2887, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stad302
LSST Science Collaborations and LSST Project (2009)
LSST Science Collaborations and LSST Project. 2009, LSST Science Book, Version 2.0.
https://arxiv.org/abs/0912.0201
T. pandas development team (2020)
pandas development team, T. 2020, pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas,, latest Zenodo, doi:
10.5281/zenodo.3509134
F. Pedregosa et al. (2011)
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., et al. 2011, Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python, Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12, 2825
D. A. Perley et al. (2020)
Perley, D. A., Fremling, C., Sollerman, J., et al. 2020, The Zwicky Transient Facility Bright Transient Survey. II. A Public Statistical Sample for Exploring Supernova Demographics, The Astrophysical Journal, 904, 35, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/abbd98
M. M. Phillips (1993)
Phillips, M. M. 1993, The Absolute Magnitudes of Type Ia Supernovae, Astrophysical Journal Letters, 413, L105, doi:
10.1086/186970
A. G. Riess et al. (1996)
Riess, A. G., Press, W. H., & Kirshner, R. P. 1996, Improved Distances to Type Ia Supernovae with Multicolor Light-Curve Shapes, Astrophysical Journal, 473, 88, doi:
10.1086/178129
M. Rigault et al. (2025)
Rigault, M., Smith, M., Goobar, A., et al. 2025, ZTF SN Ia DR2: Overview, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 694, A1, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202450388
M. Rigault et al. (2025)
Rigault, M., Smith, M., Regnault, N., et al. 2025, ZTF SN Ia DR2: Study of Type Ia supernova light-curve fits, A&A, 694, A2, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202450377
B. M. Rose et al. (2025)
Rose, B. M., Vincenzi, M., Hounsell, R., et al. 2025, The Hourglass Simulation: A Catalog for the Roman High-Latitude Time-Domain Core Community Survey, The Astrophysical Journal, 988, 65, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ade1d6
N. Sarin et al. (2024)
Sarin, N., Hübner, M., Omand, C. M. B., et al. 2024, redback: a Bayesian inference software package for electromagnetic transients, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 531, 1203, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stae1238
E. F. Schlafly & D. P. Finkbeiner (2011)
Schlafly, E. F., & Finkbeiner, D. P. 2011, Measuring Reddening with Sloan Digital Sky Survey Stellar Spectra and Recalibrating SFD, ApJ, 737, 103, doi:
10.1088/0004-637X/737/2/103
D. J. Schlegel et al. (1998)
Schlegel, D. J., Finkbeiner, D. P., & Davis, M. 1998, Maps of Dust Infrared Emission for Use in Estimation of Reddening and Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation Foregrounds, ApJ, 500, 525, doi:
10.1086/305772
D. Spergel et al. (2015)
Spergel, D., Gehrels, N., Baltay, C., et al. 2015, Wide-Field InfrarRed Survey Telescope-Astrophysics Focused Telescope Assets WFIRST-AFTA 2015 Report, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1503.03757, doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1503.03757
M. Sullivan et al. (2010)
Sullivan, M., Conley, A., Howell, D. A., et al. 2010, The dependence of Type Ia Supernovae luminosities on their host galaxies, MNRAS, 406, 782, doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.16731.x
R. Tripp (1998)
Tripp, R. 1998, A two-parameter luminosity correction for Type Ia supernovae, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 331, 815.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1998A&A...331..815T
M. Vincenzi et al. (2024)
Vincenzi, M., Brout, D., Armstrong, P., et al. 2024, The Dark Energy Survey Supernova Program: Cosmological Analysis and Systematic Uncertainties, The Astrophysical Journal, 975, 86, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ad5e6c
P. Virtanen et al. (2020)
Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020, SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python, Nature Methods, 17, 261, doi:
10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2
Wes McKinney (2010)
Wes McKinney. 2010, in Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, ed. Stéfan van der Walt & Jarrod Millman, 56 – 61, doi:
10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a
A. Weyant et al. (2013)
Weyant, A., Schafer, C., & Wood-Vasey, W. M. 2013, Likelihood-Free Cosmological Inference with Type Ia Supernovae: Approximate Bayesian Computation for a Complete Treatment of Uncertainty, The Astrophysical Journal, 764, 116, doi:
10.1088/0004-637X/764/2/116
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA