Controller Design for Structured State-space Models via Contraction Theory
Report GitHub Issue
Г—
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
I
Introduction
II
Preliminaries
II-A
Structured State-space Models (SSMs)
II-B
Contraction Analysis
III
Main results
III-A
Controllability & Observability of SSMs
III-B
State feedback controller
III-C
Observer design
III-D
Separation principle for the SSMs
IV
Numerical Example
V
Conclusions
References
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2604.07069v1 [eess.SY] 08 Apr 2026
\usephysicsmodule
ab, diagmat, xmat
\patchcmd
\@IEEEyesnumber
\patchcmd
\@@IEEEeqnarray
\patchcmd
\@@IEEEeqnarraycr
\patchcmd
\@@IEEEeqnarraycr
\patchcmd
\@@IEEEeqnarraycr
\patchcmd
\@@IEEEeqnarraycr
Controller Design for Structured State-space Models via Contraction Theory
Muhammad Zakwan
вҖ 
, Vaibhav Gupta
вҖ 
, Alireza Karimi, Efe C. Balta, Giancarlo Ferrari-Trecate
*This work is funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant no. 200021-204962), NCCR Automation, a National Centre of Competence in Research, funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant no. 51NF40_225155), and the NECON project (grant no. 200021-219431).V. Gupta, G. Ferrari-Trecate, and A. Karimi are with the Laboratoire dвҖҷAutomatique, EPFL, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.M. Zakwan and E. C. Balta are with Control & Automation Group, Inspire AG, 8005 ZГјrich, Switzerland & with Automatic Control Laboratory (IfA), ETH ZГјrich, 8092 ZГјrich, Switzerland.
вҖ 
M. Zakwan and V. Gupta contributed equally to this work.Corresponding author: M. Zakwan,
muhammad.zakwan@inspire.ch
Abstract
This paper presents an indirect data-driven output feedback controller synthesis for nonlinear systems, leveraging Structured State-space Models (SSMs) as surrogate models. SSMs have emerged as a compelling alternative in modelling time-series data and dynamical systems. They can capture long-term dependencies while maintaining linear computational complexity with respect to the sequence length, in comparison to the quadratic complexity of Transformer-based architectures. The contributions of this work are threefold. We provide the first analysis of controllability and observability of SSMs, which leads to scalable control design via Linear Matrix Inequalities (LMIs) that leverage contraction theory. Moreover, a separation principle for SSMs is established, enabling the independent design of observers and state-feedback controllers while preserving the exponential stability of the closed-loop system. The effectiveness of the proposed framework is demonstrated through a numerical example, showcasing nonlinear system identification and the synthesis of an output feedback controller.
I
Introduction
System Identification (SysId) is a foundational pillar of control theory, offering a data-based mathematical representation of an underlying dynamical process and thereby facilitating the analysis, design, and implementation of a wide range of control strategies. While linear SysId techniques have advanced significantly in recent decades due to the availability of well-developed tools, little has been done for nonlinear SysId. The application of linear SysId on nonlinear systems can lead to poor control performance or even instability in practical applications. Consequently, nonlinear SysId has emerged as a pivotal tool in modern control theory.
Nonlinear SysId remains an active field of research, with the choice of optimal nonlinear parametric models still an open question. Model structure often depends on the specific system under consideration, leading to tailored analyses and controller designs that are often limited to particular dynamical systems or applications. A recent survey
[
schoukens_NonlinearSystemIdentification_2019
]
summarises various classical frameworks for nonlinear SysId, highlighting their strengths and limitations. Classical approaches include SysId Nonlinear Autoregressive eXogenous (NARX) models
[
billings2013nonlinear
]
and kernel-based techniques like Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces (RKHS) or Support Vector Machines (SVMs)
[
pillonetto2014kernel
,
schon2011system
]
. These methods often suffer from challenges, including non-obvious kernel selection, lack of interpretability, scalability, and lack of controller design methods
[
brunton2022data
]
. Here, interpretability refers to the ability to understand a modelвҖҷs behaviour and quantifying properties such as stability, finite or incremental
в„’
2
\mathcal{L}_{2}
gain, Lipschitz continuity, and dissipativity. Recently, Machine Learning (ML) models have gained popularity due to increased computational power
[
chiuso2019system
]
, yet their intrinsic black-box nature hinders interpretability and controller synthesis. These challenges highlight the need to better integrate system identification with control design.
Recently, Structured State-space Models (SSMs), such as Mamba
[
gu2024mamba
]
, have emerged as an alternative to Transformers for sequence modelling. Therefore, they are also natural candidates as surrogate models for nonlinear SysId. A typical SSM consists of a recurrent unit, such as a linear time-invariant dynamical system, surrounded by nonlinear neural-network
scaffoldings
that map the signal into higher dimensions. SSMs have gained significant traction in both the machine learning and control communities
[
alonso2025state
,
bonassi2024structured
]
due to their ability to capture long-term dependencies in time-series data while offering linear complexity with respect to sequence length, in contrast to the quadratic complexity of Transformer-based architectures. Dynamics and control system theory can be employed to analyse and interpret the properties of the recurrent unit, such as stability, to yield an interpretable nonlinear model suitable for controller synthesis.
In this paper, SSMs are used as surrogate models for indirect controller design synthesis. Specifically, we adopt a variant of SSM, where the recurrent unit is a discrete-time linear time-invariant system called Linear Recurrent Unit (LRU)
[
orvieto2023resurrecting
]
, and the scaffoldings are nonlinear NN maps. First, a sufficient structural condition for the controllability and observability of SSMs is derived, which is essential for output feedback controller design. Then, based on contraction theory
[
lohmiller1998contraction
,
FB-CTDS
]
and discrete-time control contraction metrics
[
manchester2017control
]
, convex sufficient conditions for the synthesis of a state-feedback controller and a Luenberger-like observer are provided. Interestingly, these conditions take the form of semidefinite programs that can be solved efficiently. The controller and observer pair guarantees global exponential closed-loop stability of the identified nonlinear model. Analogous to linear system theory, a separation principle for controller and observer design is provided, which is based on the auxiliary result on the input-to-state stability of the closed-loop system with a state-feedback controller.
Related work:
Taking into account the expressivity of Neural Networks (NNs) for nonlinear SysId, a stream of works has considered indirect controller design via Recurrent NNs (RNNs) such as Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTMs). In these approaches, a surrogate model is identified, and then a controller is designed via Linear Matrix Inequalities (LMIs)
[
la2024regional
]
, or the model is used for prediction in Model Predictive Control (MPC)
[
ravasio2024lmi
]
. While this approach is promising, there are several caveats. For instance, one has to impose or promote desired properties such as incremental input-to-state (
Оҙ
\delta
-ISS) stability
[
bonassi2021stability
]
to employ the model for controller design. Moreover, training LSTMs is more time-consuming compared to SSMs, as the simulation can be performed via the well-established parallel-scan method in the latter, whereas training LSTMs and RNNs requires expensive sequential roll-outs.
Besides nonlinear RNNs, linear SysId via ML methods has also been explored. In particular, the authors of
[
di2024simba
,
di2024stable
]
have demonstrated that backpropagation and auto differentiation can be leveraged to identify centralised and decentralised linear models that are guaranteed to be stable without compromising expressivity. While these models can be used for controller design, they cannot capture nonlinear intricacies. Another recent work
[
forgione_DynoNetNeuralNetwork_2021
]
proposes a computationally friendly framework for nonlinear SysId based on Wiener-Hammerstein models, which uses linear dynamical operators as elementary building blocks in the NN architecture. While these models are highly expressive, easy to train, and exhibit state-of-the-art performance on nonlinear SysId benchmarks, the controller design procedure is not straightforward, therefore limiting their practical usage.
A parallel stream of works focuses on designing or training controllers that guarantee the stability of the closed-loop system
by design
. In this framework, the controller is typically parametrised by an NN such that it ensures closed-loop stability both during and after training. In most cases, stability is guaranteed by compositional properties of dissipative systems. For instance, compositional properties of port-Hamiltonian systems have been considered in
[
furieri2022distributed
]
, and dissipative properties such as
в„’
2
\mathcal{L}_{2}
gain have been explored in
[
zakwan2024neural
,
zakwan2024neural2
]
. While these methods ensure stability regardless of the choice of parameters, they are heavily dependent on neural Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE)
[
chen2018neural
]
, which lose key desirable properties upon discretisation, posing a challenge for real-world implementations. Moreover, training these models along with integrating the ODE takes more time compared to the fast inference of SSMs. Similarly, several results leverage system-level synthesis
[
furieri2022neural
]
and internal model control
[
furieri2024learning
]
for designing nonlinear controllers for nonlinear systems. Moreover, in
[
zakwan2024neuralcontrol
]
, contraction theory
[
lohmiller1998contraction
,
FB-CTDS
]
has been employed for the set-point stabilisation of control-affine systems.
However, these approaches are model-dependent and computationally expensive to train compared to SSMs.
The main contributions of the paper are as follows:
вҖў
Sufficient conditions for the controllability and observability of SSMs with an LRU are established.
вҖў
LMIs for the synthesis of state feedback and state observer are derived, ensuring the input-to-state stability of the closed-loop system.
вҖў
Analogous to linear system theory, a separation principle for the state-feedback controller and the observer is presented for the class of SSMs considered.
We demonstrate the proposed data-driven output feedback control strategy on a nonlinear DC motor subject to loads, Coulomb friction, and dead zone.
The paper is organised as follows:
Section
II
introduces basic notations, reviews SSMs, and contraction theory.
Section
III-A
establishes the controllability and observability conditions for SSMs.
Sections
III-B
and
III-C
derive the state feedback controller and state observer, respectively.
Section
III-D
validates the separation principle for the proposed framework. In
Section
IV
, the framework is applied to a nonlinear DC motor for SysId using SSMs and stabilising controller design. Finally,
Section
V
concludes the paper and discusses future research directions.
II
Preliminaries
Notations
в„қ
\mathbb{R}
and
в„Ӯ
\mathbb{C}
denote the real and complex numbers, respectively.
M
вү»
(
вӘ°
)
вҖӢ
N
{M\succ(\succeq)\,N}
indicates that
M
вҲ’
N
{M-N}
is positive (semi-) definite,
I
I
is the identity matrix, and
M
рқ–і
M^{\mathsf{T}}
is the transpose of matrix
M
M
. The standard Euclidean norm is denoted as
вҲҘ
вӢ…
вҲҘ
\norm{\cdot}
. A function
f
:
в„қ
n
вҶҰ
в„қ
m
{f:\mathbb{R}^{n}\mapsto\mathbb{R}^{m}}
is (
Ој
\mu
,
ОҪ
\nu
)-bi-Lipschitz if
Ој
вҖӢ
вҖ–
x
вҲ’
y
вҖ–
вүӨ
вҖ–
f
вҖӢ
(
x
)
вҲ’
f
вҖӢ
(
y
)
вҖ–
вүӨ
ОҪ
вҖӢ
вҖ–
x
вҲ’
y
вҖ–
,
вҲҖ
x
,
y
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
\mu\norm{x-y}\leq\norm{f(x)-f(y)}\leq\nu\norm{x-y},\quad\forall x,y\in\mathbb{R}^{n}
for some
0
<
Ој
вүӨ
ОҪ
{0<\mu\leq\nu}
, and its Jacobian
рқ’Ҙ
вҖӢ
(
x
)
\mathcal{J}(x)
satisfies,
Ој
вүӨ
Пғ
ВҜ
вҖӢ
(
рқ’Ҙ
вҖӢ
(
x
)
)
вүӨ
Пғ
ВҜ
вҖӢ
(
рқ’Ҙ
вҖӢ
(
x
)
)
вүӨ
ОҪ
,
вҲҖ
x
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
\mu\leq\underline{\sigma}(\mathcal{J}(x))\leq\bar{\sigma}(\mathcal{J}(x))\leq\nu,\quad\forall x\in\mathbb{R}^{n}
where
Пғ
ВҜ
вҖӢ
(
вӢ…
)
\underline{\sigma}(\cdot)
and
Пғ
ВҜ
вҖӢ
(
вӢ…
)
\bar{\sigma}(\cdot)
denote the minimum and maximum singular values, respectively.
II-A
Structured State-space Models (SSMs)
SSMs are closely related to RNNs and classical state-space models. However, unlike RNNs, which process sequences iteratively, SSMs utilise global convolution
[
gu_MambaLinearTimeSequence_2024
]
or Parallel scan
[
blelloch_PrefixSumsTheir_1990
]
, leading to more efficient training and inference.
While several variants of SSMs exist in the literature, in this paper, the primary focus will be on the architecture illustrated in
Fig.
1
. The fundamental components of an SSM are the вҖҳRecurrent UnitвҖҷ (RU), the nonlinear input lifting (
рқ’®
u
\mathcal{S}_{u}
), and the nonlinear output projection (
рқ’®
y
\mathcal{S}_{y}
). The input liftings and output projections are commonly referred to as
scaffoldings
.
1
1
1
In general, SSMs refer to deep models composed of multiple layers of the architecture depicted in
Fig.
1
. However, in this paper, the term вҖҳSSMвҖҷ denotes a single layer rather than a deep model.
In this paper, it is assumed that
рқ’®
u
\mathcal{S}_{u}
and
рқ’®
y
\mathcal{S}_{y}
are
bi-Lipschitz
. The bi-Lipschitzness property can be verified and computed a posteriori
[
fazlyab_EfficientAccurateEstimation_2019
]
, or enforced a priori through structure
[
araujo_UnifiedAlgebraicPerspective_2022
,
wang_MonotoneBiLipschitzPolyakLojasiewicz_2024
]
. This assumption guarantees the controllability and observability of the SSM, as shown in
section
III-A
.
\lxSVG@picture
рқ’®
u
\mathcal{S}_{u}
Recurrent
Unit (RU)
рқ’®
y
\mathcal{S}_{y}
u
u
u
ВҜ
\bar{u}
y
ВҜ
\bar{y}
y
y
\endlxSVG@picture
Figure 1
:
Typical SSM layer
The recurrent unit is typically a discrete-time state-space model. In this paper, we focus on an LRU
[
orvieto2023resurrecting
]
, defined using the following discrete-time state-space equations:
x
k
+
1
\displaystyle x_{k+1}
=
A
вҖӢ
x
k
+
B
вҖӢ
u
ВҜ
k
\displaystyle=Ax_{k}+B\bar{u}_{k}
(1a)
y
ВҜ
k
\displaystyle\bar{y}_{k}
=
C
вҖӢ
x
k
+
D
вҖӢ
u
ВҜ
k
\displaystyle=Cx_{k}+D\bar{u}_{k}
(1b)
where
x
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
x
{x\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{x}}}
,
u
ВҜ
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
u
ВҜ
{\bar{u}\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{\bar{u}}}}
, and
y
ВҜ
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
y
ВҜ
{\bar{y}\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{\bar{y}}}}
denote the state, input, and output, respectively.
2
2
2
(
u
ВҜ
k
,
y
ВҜ
k
(\bar{u}_{k},\bar{y}_{k}
) denote the LRU input-output pair, while
(
u
k
,
y
k
)
(u_{k},y_{k})
correspond to the SSM (
2
).
The matrices
A
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
x
Г—
n
x
{A\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{x}\times n_{x}}}
,
B
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
x
Г—
n
u
ВҜ
{B\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{x}\times n_{\bar{u}}}}
,
C
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
y
ВҜ
Г—
n
x
{C\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{\bar{y}}\times n_{x}}}
, and
D
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
y
ВҜ
Г—
n
u
ВҜ
{D\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{\bar{y}}\times n_{\bar{u}}}}
are trainable parameters. We assume that
(
A
,
B
)
(A,B)
is controllable and
(
A
,
C
)
(A,C)
is observable.
Thus, the nonlinear model for the SSM can be written as:
x
k
+
1
\displaystyle x_{k+1}
=
A
вҖӢ
x
k
+
B
вҖӢ
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
u
k
)
\displaystyle=Ax_{k}+B\mathcal{S}_{u}(u_{k})
(2a)
y
k
\displaystyle y_{k}
=
рқ’®
y
вҖӢ
(
C
вҖӢ
x
k
+
D
вҖӢ
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
u
k
)
)
\displaystyle=\mathcal{S}_{y}(Cx_{k}+D\mathcal{S}_{u}(u_{k}))
(2b)
II-B
Contraction Analysis
Contraction theory
[
lohmiller1998contraction
,
tsukamoto2021contraction
]
provides a systematic framework to analyse and ensure stability of discrete-time nonlinear systems along arbitrary, time-varying (feasible) reference trajectories by examining the associated displacement or differential dynamics. Stability analysis and controller synthesis can be jointly addressed through Discrete-time Control Contraction Metrics (DCCMs)
[
tsukamoto2021contraction
]
, which guarantee the systemвҖҷs contraction properties.
To introduce the contraction-based approaches, consider a discrete-time nonlinear control-affine system as follows
x
k
+
1
=
f
вҖӢ
(
x
k
)
+
g
вҖӢ
(
x
k
)
вҖӢ
u
k
x_{k+1}=f(x_{k})+g(x_{k})u_{k}
(3)
where
x
k
вҲҲ
рқ’і
вҠҶ
в„қ
n
x
{x_{k}\in\mathcal{X}\subseteq\mathbb{R}^{n_{x}}}
and
u
k
вҲҲ
рқ’°
вҠҶ
в„қ
n
u
{u_{k}\in\mathcal{U}\subseteq\mathbb{R}^{n_{u}}}
denote the system states and the control inputs, respectively.
The corresponding differential dynamics can be given by
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
+
1
=
A
k
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
+
B
k
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
u
k
,
\delta x_{k+1}=A_{k}\delta{x_{k}}+B_{k}\delta{u_{k}},
(4)
where
A
k
=
A
вҖӢ
(
x
k
)
вү”
вҲӮ
x
k
+
1
вҲӮ
x
k
{A_{k}=A(x_{k})\coloneqq\frac{\partial x_{k+1}}{\partial x_{k}}}
and
B
k
=
B
вҖӢ
(
x
k
)
вү”
вҲӮ
x
k
+
1
вҲӮ
u
k
{B_{k}=B(x_{k})\coloneqq\frac{\partial x_{k+1}}{\partial u_{k}}}
.
Consider a state-feedback control law for the differential dynamics (
4
) defined as
Оҙ
вҖӢ
u
k
=
K
вҖӢ
(
x
k
)
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
\delta{u_{k}}=K(x_{k})\delta{x_{k}}
(5)
where
K
K
is a state-dependent function.
Definition 1
The discrete-time nonlinear system (
3
), with the associated differential dynamics (
4
) and differential state-feedback controller (
5
), is said to be contracting with respect to a uniformly bounded, symmetric, and positive definite metric
M
k
=
M
вҖӢ
(
x
k
)
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
x
Г—
n
x
M_{k}=M(x_{k})\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{x}\times n_{x}}
,
if for all
x
вҲҲ
рқ’і
{x\in\mathcal{X}}
and all
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
\delta x
in tangent space of
рқ’і
\mathcal{X}
, the following condition holds for some constant contraction rate
0
<
ПҒ
<
1
{0<\rho<1}
:
(
A
k
+
B
k
вҖӢ
K
k
)
рқ–і
вҖӢ
M
k
+
1
вҖӢ
(
A
k
+
B
k
вҖӢ
K
k
)
вҲ’
(
1
вҲ’
ПҒ
)
вҖӢ
M
k
вүә
0
(A_{k}+B_{k}K_{k})^{\mathsf{T}}M_{k+1}(A_{k}+B_{k}K_{k})-(1-\rho)M_{k}\prec 0
(6)
Furthermore, a subset of the state space
рқ’і
\mathcal{X}
is defined as a вҖҳcontraction regionвҖҷ if condition (
6
) holds for every point within that subset.
III
Main results
This section establishes sufficient structural conditions to guarantee the controllability and observability of SSMs.
III-A
Controllability & Observability of SSMs
The analysis of controllability and observability of a class of nonlinear systems can be conducted only considering the local controllability and local observability at almost all points, respectively. Readers are referred to
[
boscain_LocalControllabilityDoes_2023
]
for more details.
Definition 2
A system is locally controllable (or observable) in the neighbourhood of
(
x
k
,
u
k
)
(x_{k},u_{k})
if its differential dynamics around
(
x
k
,
u
k
)
(x_{k},u_{k})
is controllable (or observable).
The local controllability of a nonlinear system can be analysed using the controllability of its differential form along the solutions of the system. The differential dynamics for the LRU (
1
) is given by,
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
+
1
\displaystyle\delta x_{k+1}
=
A
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
+
B
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
u
ВҜ
k
\displaystyle=A\,\delta x_{k}+B\,\delta{\bar{u}}_{k}
(7a)
Оҙ
вҖӢ
y
ВҜ
k
\displaystyle\delta{\bar{y}}_{k}
=
C
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
+
D
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
u
ВҜ
k
.
\displaystyle=C\,\delta x_{k}+D\,\delta{\bar{u}}_{k}.
(7b)
Defining the Jacobian of the scaffolding
рқ’®
u
\mathcal{S}_{u}
and
рқ’®
y
\mathcal{S}_{y}
as
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k}
and
рқ’Ҙ
k
y
\mathcal{J}^{y}_{k}
, for each
k
k
respectively, the differential form of the scaffolding can be written as:
Оҙ
вҖӢ
u
ВҜ
k
=
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
u
k
{\delta{\bar{u}}_{k}=\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k}\,\delta{u}_{k}}
,
Оҙ
вҖӢ
y
k
=
рқ’Ҙ
k
y
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
y
ВҜ
k
{\delta{y}_{k}=\mathcal{J}^{y}_{k}\,\delta{\bar{y}}_{k}}
.
Hence, the differential form of the SSM (
2
) is,
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
+
1
\displaystyle\delta x_{k+1}
=
A
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
+
B
вҖӢ
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
u
k
\displaystyle=\phantom{\mathcal{J}^{y}_{k}}A\,\delta x_{k}+\phantom{\mathcal{J}^{y}_{k}}B\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k}\,\delta u_{k}
(8a)
Оҙ
вҖӢ
y
k
\displaystyle\delta y_{k}
=
рқ’Ҙ
k
y
вҖӢ
C
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
+
рқ’Ҙ
k
y
вҖӢ
D
вҖӢ
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
u
k
\displaystyle=\mathcal{J}^{y}_{k}C\,\delta x_{k}+\mathcal{J}^{y}_{k}D\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k}\,\delta u_{k}
(8b)
Proposition 1
(Local Controllability)
The SSM model (
2
) with the differential form (
8
) is locally controllable if the recurrent unit is controllable and the input nonlinearity (
рқ’®
u
\mathcal{S}_{u}
) is a bi-Lipschitz function.
Proof:
Discrete-time controllability Gramian for (
8
) is
W
d
=
вҲ‘
k
=
0
k
1
A
k
вҖӢ
B
вҖӢ
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
вҖӢ
(
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
)
рқ–і
вҖӢ
B
рқ–і
вҖӢ
\ab
вҖӢ
(
A
рқ–і
)
k
W_{d}=\sum_{k=0}^{k_{1}}A^{k}B\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k}(\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k})^{\mathsf{T}}B^{\mathsf{T}}\ab(A^{\mathsf{T}})^{k}
(9)
For the SSM model to be locally controllable, the Gramian
W
d
W_{d}
must be non-singular for some finite
k
1
k_{1}
. Since
(
A
,
B
)
(A,B)
is controllable,
вҲғ
k
~
1
\exists\,\tilde{k}_{1}
such that
W
d
вҖІ
=
вҲ‘
k
=
0
k
~
1
A
k
вҖӢ
B
вҖӢ
B
рқ–і
вҖӢ
\ab
вҖӢ
(
A
рқ–і
)
k
вү»
0
W_{d}^{\prime}=\sum_{k=0}^{\tilde{k}_{1}}A^{k}BB^{\mathsf{T}}\ab(A^{\mathsf{T}})^{k}\succ 0
Moreover, since the input nonlinearity
рқ’®
u
\mathcal{S}_{u}
is a (
Ој
u
\mu_{u}
,
ОҪ
u
\nu_{u}
)-bi-Lipschitz function, its Jacobian
рқ’Ҙ
u
\mathcal{J}^{u}
satisfies
0
<
Ој
u
вүӨ
Пғ
ВҜ
вҖӢ
(
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
)
вүӨ
Пғ
ВҜ
вҖӢ
(
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
)
вүӨ
ОҪ
u
.
0<\mu_{u}\leq\underline{\sigma}(\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k})\leq\bar{\sigma}(\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k})\leq\nu_{u}.
Utilising these properties along with (
9
), it can be observed that for
k
1
=
k
~
1
k_{1}=\tilde{k}_{1}
, one has
ОҪ
u
2
вҖӢ
W
d
вҖІ
вӘ°
W
d
вӘ°
Ој
u
2
вҖӢ
W
d
вҖІ
вү»
0
.
\nu_{u}^{2}W_{d}^{\prime}\succeq W_{d}\succeq\mu_{u}^{2}W_{d}^{\prime}\succ 0.
This implies that the Gramian
W
d
W_{d}
is non-singular.
вҲҺ
Proposition 2
(Local Observability)
The SSM model (
2
) with the differential form (
8
) is locally observable if the recurrent unit is observable and the output nonlinearity (
рқ’®
y
\mathcal{S}_{y}
) is a bi-Lipschitz function.
Proof:
The proof parallels that of controllability, employing the discrete-time observability Gramian.
вҲҺ
III-B
State feedback controller
Consider the discrete-time nonlinear system
x
k
+
1
=
A
вҖӢ
x
k
+
B
вҖӢ
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
u
k
)
,
x_{k+1}=Ax_{k}+B\mathcal{S}_{u}(u_{k}),
(10)
where
x
k
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
x
{x_{k}\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{x}}}
is the state,
A
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
x
Г—
n
x
{A\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{x}\times n_{x}}}
and
B
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
x
Г—
n
u
{B\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{x}\times n_{u}}}
are known constant matrices, and
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
вӢ…
)
:
в„қ
n
u
вҶҰ
в„қ
n
u
{\mathcal{S}_{u}(\cdot):\mathbb{R}^{n_{u}}\mapsto\mathbb{R}^{n_{u}}}
is a nonlinear mapping which is (
Ој
u
\mu_{u}
,
ОҪ
u
\nu_{u}
)-bi-Lipschitz, and satisfies
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
0
)
=
0
\mathcal{S}_{u}(0)=0
. The goal of this section is to design a static state-feedback gain
K
K
, such that for
u
k
=
K
вҖӢ
x
k
{u_{k}=Kx_{k}}
the closed-loop system is exponentially stable for all admissible (
Ој
u
\mu_{u}
,
ОҪ
u
\nu_{u}
)-bi-Lipschitz nonlinearities.
Theorem 1
(State-feedback Controller)
Suppose there exist matrices
P
=
P
рқ–і
вү»
0
{P=P^{\mathsf{T}}\succ 0}
,
Y
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
x
Г—
n
x
Y\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{x}\times n_{x}}
and
X
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
u
Г—
n
x
X\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{u}\times n_{x}}
satisfying the following LMI for some
Пғ
>
0
{\sigma>0}
and
ПҒ
c
вҲҲ
(
0
,
1
)
{\rho_{c}\in(0,1)}
:
[
(
1
вҲ’
ПҒ
c
)
вҖӢ
P
вҲ’
Пғ
вҖӢ
B
вҖӢ
B
рқ–і
A
вҖӢ
Y
+
Оұ
u
вҖӢ
B
вҖӢ
X
0
вӢҶ
Y
рқ–і
+
Y
вҲ’
P
ОІ
u
вҖӢ
X
рқ–і
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
Пғ
вҖӢ
I
]
вү»
0
\begin{bmatrix}(1-\rho_{c})P-\sigma BB^{\mathsf{T}}&AY+\alpha_{u}BX&0\\
\star&Y^{\mathsf{T}}+Y-P&\beta_{u}X^{\mathsf{T}}\\
\star&\star&\sigma I\\
\end{bmatrix}\succ 0
(11)
where
Оұ
u
=
ОҪ
u
+
Ој
u
2
{\alpha_{u}=\frac{\nu_{u}+\mu_{u}}{2}}
and
ОІ
u
=
ОҪ
u
вҲ’
Ој
u
2
{\beta_{u}=\frac{\nu_{u}-\mu_{u}}{2}}
. Then, the nonlinear closed-loop system (
10
) is exponentially stable for bi-Lipschitz functions
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
вӢ…
)
\mathcal{S}_{u}(\cdot)
, and the stabilising controller gain is given by
K
=
X
вҖӢ
Y
вҲ’
1
{K=XY^{-1}}
.
Proof:
Define the variational closed-loop dynamics under the control policy
u
k
=
K
вҖӢ
x
k
u_{k}=Kx_{k}
and denote the Jacobian of
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
вӢ…
)
\mathcal{S}_{u}(\cdot)
with respect to input as
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k}
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
+
1
=
\ab
вҖӢ
(
A
+
B
вҖӢ
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
вҖӢ
K
)
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
\delta x_{k+1}=\ab(A+B\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k}K)\delta x_{k}
(12)
Consider the candidate Lyapunov function
V
вҖӢ
(
z
)
=
z
рқ–і
вҖӢ
P
вҖӢ
z
{V(z)=z^{\mathsf{T}}Pz}
, with
P
=
P
рқ–і
вү»
0
{P=P^{\mathsf{T}}\succ 0}
. The forward difference satisfies
V
вҖӢ
(
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
+
1
)
вҲ’
V
вҖӢ
(
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
)
=
(
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
)
рқ–і
вҖӢ
\ab
вҖӢ
(
A
cl
,
k
рқ–і
вҖӢ
P
вҖӢ
A
cl
,
k
вҲ’
P
)
вҖӢ
(
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
)
V(\delta x_{k+1})-V(\delta x_{k})=(\delta x_{k})^{\mathsf{T}}\ab(A_{\text{cl},k}^{\mathsf{T}}PA_{\text{cl},k}-P)(\delta x_{k})
where
A
cl
,
k
=
A
+
B
вҖӢ
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
вҖӢ
K
{A_{\text{cl},k}=A+B\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k}K}
. To ensure exponential decay, it suffices to require that
A
cl
,
k
рқ–і
вҖӢ
P
вҖӢ
A
cl
,
k
вҲ’
(
1
вҲ’
ПҒ
c
)
вҖӢ
P
вүә
0
,
A_{\text{cl},k}^{\mathsf{T}}PA_{\text{cl},k}-(1-\rho_{c})P\prec 0,
(13)
for all
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k}
such that
0
<
Ој
u
вүӨ
Пғ
ВҜ
вҖӢ
(
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
)
вүӨ
Пғ
ВҜ
вҖӢ
(
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
)
вүӨ
ОҪ
u
0<\mu_{u}\leq\underline{\sigma}(\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k})\leq\bar{\sigma}(\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k})\leq\nu_{u}
, which would ensure the contraction rate of
ПҒ
c
\rho_{c}
for the variational dynamics.
Define the congruence transformation
T
=
[
I
вҲ’
A
cl
,
k
]
{T=\begin{bmatrix}I&-A_{\text{cl},k}\end{bmatrix}}
which is full row rank, and a free parameter
Y
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
x
Г—
n
x
{Y\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{x}\times n_{x}}}
. Then, (
13
) can be rewritten as,
T
вҖӢ
[
(
1
вҲ’
ПҒ
c
)
вҖӢ
P
A
cl
,
k
вҖӢ
Y
вӢҶ
Y
рқ–і
+
Y
вҲ’
P
]
вҖӢ
T
рқ–і
\displaystyle T\begin{bmatrix}(1-\rho_{c})P&A_{\text{cl},k}Y\\
\star&Y^{\mathsf{T}}+Y-P\end{bmatrix}T^{\mathsf{T}}
вү»
0
\displaystyle\succ 0
(14)
вҮ”
[
(
1
вҲ’
ПҒ
c
)
вҖӢ
P
A
cl
,
k
вҖӢ
Y
вӢҶ
Y
рқ–і
+
Y
вҲ’
P
]
\displaystyle\iff\begin{bmatrix}(1-\rho_{c})P&A_{\text{cl},k}Y\\
\star&Y^{\mathsf{T}}+Y-P\end{bmatrix}
вү»
0
.
\displaystyle\succ 0.
(15)
By introducing a change of variables
X
=
K
вҖӢ
Y
{X=KY}
, (
15
) is equal to
[
(
1
вҲ’
ПҒ
c
)
вҖӢ
P
A
вҖӢ
Y
+
B
вҖӢ
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
вҖӢ
X
вӢҶ
Y
рқ–і
+
Y
вҲ’
P
]
вү»
0
\begin{bmatrix}(1-\rho_{c})P&AY+B\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k}X\\
\star&Y^{\mathsf{T}}+Y-P\end{bmatrix}\succ 0
(16)
For some
О”
\Delta
with
Пғ
ВҜ
вҖӢ
(
О”
)
вүӨ
1
\bar{\sigma}(\Delta)\leq 1
, all
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
\mathcal{J}_{k}^{u}
can be written as
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
=
\ab
вҖӢ
(
ОҪ
u
+
Ој
u
2
)
вҸҹ
Оұ
u
вҖӢ
I
+
\ab
вҖӢ
(
ОҪ
u
вҲ’
Ој
u
2
)
вҸҹ
ОІ
u
вҖӢ
О”
\mathcal{J}_{k}^{u}=\underbrace{\ab(\frac{\nu_{u}+\mu_{u}}{2})}_{\alpha_{u}}I+\underbrace{\ab(\frac{\nu_{u}-\mu_{u}}{2})}_{\beta_{u}}\Delta
Then, the inequality (
16
) can be rewritten as,
[
(
1
вҲ’
ПҒ
c
)
вҖӢ
P
A
вҖӢ
Y
+
B
вҖӢ
(
Оұ
u
вҖӢ
I
+
ОІ
u
вҖӢ
О”
)
вҖӢ
X
вӢҶ
Y
рқ–і
+
Y
вҲ’
P
]
вү»
0
\begin{bmatrix}(1-\rho_{c})P&AY+B(\alpha_{u}I+\beta_{u}\Delta)X\\
\star&Y^{\mathsf{T}}+Y-P\end{bmatrix}\succ 0
(17)
Then, using
[
hindi_ComputingOptimalUncertainty_2002
, Lemma 2]
, the equivalent LMI (
11
) is obtained. If a feasible solution
(
X
,
Y
)
(X,Y)
exists, the stabilising feedback gain can be computed as
K
=
X
вҖӢ
Y
вҲ’
1
{K=XY^{-1}}
.
вҲҺ
Theorem
1
provides a convex condition ensuring robust stability of the bi-Lipschitz nonlinear system (
10
). It captures the uncertainty in the slope of the nonlinearity and guarantees stability for all admissible bi-Lipschitz mappings
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
вӢ…
)
\mathcal{S}_{u}(\cdot)
.
III-C
Observer design
It is well established that control and observer design problems for linear systems enjoy a fundamental and elegant
duality
relation (see, e.g.,
[
hespanha2018linear
]
). In this section, the result in
[
manchester2014control
]
, stating that DCCMs possess an analogous duality relationship to nonlinear observer designs formulated using Riemannian metrics, is leveraged. In particular, we provide a tractable LMI formulation, in contrast to
[
manchester2014control
]
, which provides only infinite-dimensional conditions. Furthermore, a novel construction of a Luenberger-like observer for the SSM is presented.
Consider the following Luenberger-like observer:
x
^
k
+
1
\displaystyle\hat{x}_{k+1}
=
A
вҖӢ
x
^
k
+
B
вҖӢ
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
u
k
)
+
L
вҖӢ
(
y
^
k
вҲ’
y
k
)
\displaystyle=A\hat{x}_{k}+B\mathcal{S}_{u}(u_{k})+L(\hat{y}_{k}-y_{k})
(18a)
y
^
k
\displaystyle\hat{y}_{k}
=
рқ’®
y
вҖӢ
(
C
вҖӢ
x
^
k
+
D
вҖӢ
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
u
k
)
)
\displaystyle=\mathcal{S}_{y}(C\hat{x}_{k}+D\mathcal{S}_{u}(u_{k}))
(18b)
where
L
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
x
Г—
n
y
L\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{x}\times n_{y}}
is the observer gain to be computed.
Theorem 2
(State Observer)
Suppose there exist matrices
Q
=
Q
рқ–і
вү»
0
{Q=Q^{\mathsf{T}}\succ 0}
,
U
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
x
Г—
n
x
{U\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{x}\times n_{x}}}
and
V
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
x
Г—
n
y
{V\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{x}\times n_{y}}}
satisfying the following LMI for some
О·
>
0
\eta>0
and
ПҒ
o
вҲҲ
(
0
,
1
)
\rho_{o}\in(0,1)
:
[
(
1
вҲ’
ПҒ
o
)
вҖӢ
Q
вҲ’
О·
вҖӢ
C
рқ–і
вҖӢ
C
(
U
вҖӢ
A
+
Оұ
y
вҖӢ
V
вҖӢ
C
)
рқ–і
0
вӢҶ
U
+
U
рқ–і
вҲ’
Q
ОІ
y
вҖӢ
V
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
О·
вҖӢ
I
]
вү»
0
.
\begin{bmatrix}(1-\rho_{o})Q-\eta C^{\mathsf{T}}C&(UA+\alpha_{y}VC)^{\mathsf{T}}&0\\
\star&U+U^{\mathsf{T}}-Q&\beta_{y}V\\
\star&\star&\eta I\\
\end{bmatrix}\succ 0.
(19)
where
Оұ
y
=
ОҪ
y
+
Ој
y
2
{\alpha_{y}=\frac{\nu_{y}+\mu_{y}}{2}}
and
ОІ
y
=
ОҪ
y
вҲ’
Ој
y
2
{\beta_{y}=\frac{\nu_{y}-\mu_{y}}{2}}
. Then, the nonlinear observer (
18
) is exponentially stable for all bi-Lipschitz functions
рқ’®
y
вҖӢ
(
вӢ…
)
\mathcal{S}_{y}(\cdot)
, and the observer gain is given by
L
=
U
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
V
{L=U^{-1}V}
.
Proof:
The proof is done in two steps.
First, it is shown that the proposed observer is considered вҖҳcorrectвҖҷ according to the definition of correctness provided in
[
manchester2018contracting
]
. Specifically, when the proposed observer is initialised with
x
^
0
=
x
0
{\hat{x}_{0}=x_{0}}
, the observer matches the true system, i.e.,
x
^
k
=
x
k
{\hat{x}_{k}=x_{k}}
for all
k
вүҘ
0
k\geq 0
. If
x
^
0
=
x
0
{\hat{x}_{0}=x_{0}}
, from (
18
),
x
^
1
=
A
вҖӢ
x
^
0
+
B
вҖӢ
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
u
0
)
+
L
вҖӢ
(
y
^
0
вҲ’
y
0
)
0
=
x
1
{\hat{x}_{1}=A\hat{x}_{0}+B\mathcal{S}_{u}(u_{0})+\cancelto{0}{L(\hat{y}_{0}-y_{0})}=x_{1}}
.
Using induction, it can be easily proved that the proposed observer is вҖҳcorrectвҖҷ.
Second, if the LMI condition outlined in (
19
) is satisfied, then the proposed observer exhibits global exponential stability. This indicates that the error between
x
k
x_{k}
and
x
^
k
\hat{x}_{k}
converges to zero at an exponential rate, as stated in
[
manchester2018contracting
]
.
Similar to the proof for the state-feedback controller, the variational dynamics of the nonlinear observer (
18
), which describes the evolution of an infinitesimal displacement
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
^
k
\delta\hat{x}_{k}
between two neighbouring observer trajectories under identical input, is considered with the change of variables
V
=
U
вҖӢ
L
{V=UL}
. Furthermore, the observer gain can be recovered as
L
=
U
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
V
{L=U^{-1}V}
.
вҲҺ
III-D
Separation principle for the SSMs
If a linear system is both controllable (or stabilizable) and observable (or detectable), the controller and observer design can be done independently. This extremely useful property, known as the вҖҳseparation principleвҖҷ, does not hold for general non-linear systems. In
[
manchester2014output
]
, it is demonstrated that the separation principle holds for a continuous-time nonlinear system if it is universally stabilizable and detectable.
Numerous studies have also addressed the separation principle for nonlinear systems, such as those in
[
atassi2002separation
,
shiriaev2008separation
,
martinez2017separation
]
. However, these approaches often impose structural constraints on the nonlinear model or rely on high-gain observers.
The current section establishes the separation principle for the discrete-time SSM (
2
). We start by introducing a preliminary result.
Lemma 1
(Discrete-time contraction with disturbance)
Consider the discrete-time system
x
k
+
1
=
A
вҖӢ
x
k
+
B
вҖӢ
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
u
k
)
+
w
k
x_{k+1}=Ax_{k}+B\mathcal{S}_{u}(u_{k})+w_{k}
(20)
where
w
k
w_{k}
is a disturbance input. Let the state-feedback
u
k
=
K
вҖӢ
x
k
u_{k}=Kx_{k}
be the state-feedback controller designed in
Theorem
1
. Denote the closed-loop map by
ОҰ
вҖӢ
(
x
)
вү”
A
вҖӢ
x
k
+
B
вҖӢ
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
K
вҖӢ
x
k
)
{\Phi(x)\coloneqq Ax_{k}+B\mathcal{S}_{u}(Kx_{k})}
and assume there exists a smooth metric
M
=
Оҳ
рқ–і
вҖӢ
Оҳ
вү»
0
{M=\Theta^{\mathsf{T}}\Theta\succ 0}
and a constant
ПҒ
вҲҲ
(
0
,
1
)
{\rho\in(0,1)}
such that for all
x
k
x_{k}
Оҳ
вҖӢ
вҲӮ
ОҰ
вҲӮ
x
вҖӢ
(
x
k
)
вҖӢ
Оҳ
вҲ’
1
=
F
вҖӢ
(
x
k
)
\Theta\frac{\partial\Phi}{\partial x}(x_{k})\Theta^{-1}=F(x_{k})
(21)
where
вҖ–
F
вҖӢ
(
x
k
)
вҖ–
вүӨ
ПҒ
{\norm{F(x_{k})}\leq\rho}
. Furthermore, assume that
вҖ–
Оҳ
вҖ–
вүӨ
c
Оҳ
{\norm{\Theta}\leq c_{\Theta}}
for all
x
k
x_{k}
. Let
d
k
вү”
d
вҖӢ
(
x
k
,
x
k
вӢҶ
)
{d_{k}\coloneqq d(x_{k},x_{k}^{\star})}
be the Riemannian distance from
x
k
x_{k}
to
x
k
вӢҶ
x_{k}^{\star}
with respect to the metric
M
M
. Then,
d
k
+
1
вүӨ
ПҒ
вҖӢ
d
k
+
c
Оҳ
вҖӢ
вҖ–
w
k
вҖ–
,
вҲҖ
k
d_{k+1}\leq\rho d_{k}+c_{\Theta}\norm{w_{k}},\quad\forall k
(22)
Proof:
Let
Оі
k
:
[
0
,
1
]
вҶҰ
в„қ
n
x
{\gamma_{k}:[0,1]\mapsto\mathbb{R}^{n_{x}}}
be a unit-speed geodesic joining
x
k
вӢҶ
=
Оі
k
вҖӢ
(
0
)
{x_{k}^{\star}=\gamma_{k}(0)}
to
x
k
=
Оі
k
вҖӢ
(
1
)
{x_{k}=\gamma_{k}(1)}
in the metric
M
M
. Set
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
вҖӢ
(
s
)
вү”
вҲӮ
Оі
k
вҲӮ
s
{\delta x_{k}(s)\coloneqq\frac{\partial\gamma_{k}}{\partial s}}
satisfying
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
+
1
=
(
A
+
B
вҖӢ
рқ’Ҙ
k
u
вҖӢ
K
)
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
+
w
k
\delta x_{k+1}=(A+B\mathcal{J}^{u}_{k}K)\delta x_{k}+w_{k}
Define the differential coordinates
Оҙ
вҖӢ
z
k
вҖӢ
(
s
)
вү”
Оҳ
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
x
k
вҖӢ
(
s
)
{\delta z_{k}(s)\coloneqq\Theta\delta x_{k}(s)}
so that
вҖ–
Оҙ
вҖӢ
z
k
вҖӢ
(
s
)
вҖ–
\norm{\delta z_{k}(s)}
is the differential line element in the Riemannian metric
and the Riemannian distance is
d
k
=
d
вҖӢ
(
x
k
,
x
k
вӢҶ
)
=
min
Оі
вҖӢ
вҲ«
0
1
вҖ–
Оҙ
вҖӢ
z
k
вҖӢ
(
s
)
вҖ–
вҖӢ
d
s
d_{k}=d(x_{k},x_{k}^{\star})=\min_{\gamma}\int_{0}^{1}\norm{\delta z_{k}(s)}\differential{s}
In metric coordinates,
Оҙ
вҖӢ
z
k
+
1
=
Оҳ
вҖӢ
вҲӮ
ОҰ
вҲӮ
x
вҖӢ
(
x
k
)
вҖӢ
Оҳ
вҲ’
1
вҸҹ
F
вҖӢ
(
x
)
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
z
k
вҖӢ
(
s
)
+
Оҳ
вҖӢ
w
k
.
\delta z_{k+1}=\underbrace{\Theta\frac{\partial\Phi}{\partial x}(x_{k})\Theta^{-1}}_{F(x)}\delta z_{k}(s)+\Theta w_{k}.
By the contraction hypothesis,
вҖ–
F
вҖӢ
(
x
)
вҖ–
вүӨ
ПҒ
\norm{F(x)}\leq\rho
. Hence,
вҖ–
Оҙ
вҖӢ
z
k
+
1
вҖ–
вүӨ
ПҒ
вҖӢ
вҖ–
Оҙ
вҖӢ
z
k
вҖ–
+
вҖ–
Оҳ
вҖ–
вҖӢ
вҖ–
w
k
вҖ–
вүӨ
ПҒ
вҖӢ
вҖ–
Оҙ
вҖӢ
z
k
вҖ–
+
c
Оҳ
вҖӢ
вҖ–
w
k
вҖ–
.
\displaystyle\norm{\delta z_{k+1}}\leq\rho\norm{\delta z_{k}}+\norm{\Theta}\norm{w_{k}}\leq\rho\norm{\delta z_{k}}+c_{\Theta}\norm{w_{k}}.
Integrating over
s
вҲҲ
[
0
,
1
]
s\in[0,1]
d
k
+
1
\displaystyle d_{k+1}
=
вҲ«
0
1
вҖ–
Оҙ
вҖӢ
z
k
+
1
вҖӢ
(
s
)
вҖ–
вҖӢ
рқ‘‘
s
вүӨ
ПҒ
вҖӢ
вҲ«
0
1
вҖ–
Оҙ
вҖӢ
z
k
вҖӢ
(
s
)
вҖ–
вҖӢ
рқ‘‘
s
+
c
Оҳ
вҖӢ
вҖ–
w
k
вҖ–
\displaystyle=\int_{0}^{1}\norm{\delta z_{k+1}(s)}ds\leq\rho\int_{0}^{1}\norm{\delta z_{k}(s)}ds+c_{\Theta}\norm{w_{k}}
=
ПҒ
вҖӢ
d
k
+
c
Оҳ
вҖӢ
вҖ–
w
k
вҖ–
\displaystyle=\rho d_{k}+c_{\Theta}\norm{w_{k}}
gives the one-step bound on the Riemannian distance between
x
k
x_{k}
and
x
k
вӢҶ
x_{k}^{\star}
.
вҲҺ
Theorem 3
(Separation principle)
Consider a discrete-time SSM (
2
) that is both observable and controllable. The closed-loop system, which incorporates the state observer as defined in (
18
) and the state-feedback controller as defined in
Theorem
1
using the estimated state
x
^
k
\hat{x}_{k}
, exhibits exponential stability.
Proof:
The closed-loop can be written as
x
k
+
1
\displaystyle x_{k+1}
=
A
вҖӢ
x
k
+
B
вҖӢ
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
u
k
)
\displaystyle=Ax_{k}+B\mathcal{S}_{u}(u_{k})
x
^
k
+
1
\displaystyle\hat{x}_{k+1}
=
A
вҖӢ
x
^
k
+
B
вҖӢ
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
u
k
)
+
L
вҖӢ
(
y
^
k
вҲ’
y
k
)
\displaystyle=A\hat{x}_{k}+B\mathcal{S}_{u}(u_{k})+L(\hat{y}_{k}-y_{k})
y
k
\displaystyle y_{k}
=
рқ’®
y
вҖӢ
(
C
вҖӢ
x
k
+
D
вҖӢ
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
u
k
)
)
\displaystyle=\mathcal{S}_{y}(Cx_{k}+D\mathcal{S}_{u}(u_{k}))
y
^
k
\displaystyle\hat{y}_{k}
=
рқ’®
y
вҖӢ
(
C
вҖӢ
x
^
k
+
D
вҖӢ
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
u
k
)
)
\displaystyle=\mathcal{S}_{y}(C\hat{x}_{k}+D\mathcal{S}_{u}(u_{k}))
u
k
\displaystyle u_{k}
=
K
вҖӢ
x
^
k
\displaystyle=K\hat{x}_{k}
where
K
K
and
L
L
denote the state-feedback and observer gains, as defined in
Theorem
1
and
Theorem
2
, respectively.
From
Theorem
2
, the state estimates
x
^
k
\hat{x}_{k}
converge exponentially fast to the true
x
k
x_{k}
. Furthermore, the smoothness of
K
K
implies that
(
K
вҖӢ
x
^
k
вҲ’
K
вҖӢ
x
k
)
{(K\hat{x}_{k}-Kx_{k})}
is bounded and converges to zero asymptotically and since
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
0
)
=
0
\mathcal{S}_{u}(0)=0
, and
рқ’Ҙ
u
\mathcal{J}_{u}
is uniformly bounded,
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
K
вҖӢ
x
^
k
)
вҲ’
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
K
вҖӢ
x
k
)
вҶ’
0
{\mathcal{S}_{u}(K\hat{x}_{k})-\mathcal{S}_{u}(Kx_{k})\rightarrow 0}
, exponentially. So, there exist
Оҳ
\Theta
and some
ПҒ
o
вҲҲ
(
0
,
1
)
{\rho_{o}\in(0,1)}
,
c
>
0
{c>0}
such that,
вҖ–
Оҳ
вҖӢ
B
вҖӢ
\ab
вҖӢ
(
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
K
вҖӢ
x
^
k
)
вҲ’
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
K
вҖӢ
x
k
)
)
вҖ–
вүӨ
c
вҖӢ
ПҒ
o
k
\norm{\Theta B\ab(\mathcal{S}_{u}(K\hat{x}_{k})-\mathcal{S}_{u}(Kx_{k}))}\leq c\rho_{o}^{k}
Now using
Lemma
1
with
w
k
=
B
вҖӢ
\ab
вҖӢ
(
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
K
вҖӢ
x
^
k
)
вҲ’
рқ’®
u
вҖӢ
(
K
вҖӢ
x
k
)
)
w_{k}=B\ab(\mathcal{S}_{u}(K\hat{x}_{k})-\mathcal{S}_{u}(Kx_{k}))
and some constant
ПҒ
c
вҲҲ
(
0
,
1
)
\rho_{c}\in(0,1)
, it follows that
d
k
вүӨ
ПҒ
c
k
вҖӢ
d
0
+
c
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
i
=
0
k
вҲ’
1
ПҒ
c
k
вҲ’
1
вҲ’
i
вҖӢ
ПҒ
o
i
d_{k}\leq\rho_{c}^{k}d_{0}+c\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}{\rho_{c}^{k-1-i}\rho_{o}^{i}}
implying that
d
k
вҶ’
0
d_{k}\to 0
at an exponential rate, and the uniform boundedness of the metric
Оҳ
\Theta
guarantees that
x
k
x_{k}
converges to the desired trajectory
x
k
вҲ—
x_{k}^{*}
at an exponential rate.
вҲҺ
IV
Numerical Example
We consider the nonlinear DC motor model proposed in
[
kara2004nonlinear
]
, which captures the key nonlinearities, such as the input dead-zone and nonlinear friction in the drive train. This model is used as the benchmark plant for data collection, SysId, controller synthesis, and observer design. It comprises electrical and mechanical subsystems subject to nonlinearities.
Electrical Subsystem
The armature voltage dynamics of the DC motor are governed by
v
a
вҖӢ
(
t
)
=
R
a
вҖӢ
i
a
вҖӢ
(
t
)
+
L
a
вҖӢ
d
i
a
вҖӢ
(
t
)
d
t
+
e
a
вҖӢ
(
t
)
v_{a}(t)=R_{a}i_{a}(t)+L_{a}\frac{\differential{i_{a}(t)}}{\differential{t}}+e_{a}(t)
where
v
a
вҖӢ
(
t
)
v_{a}(t)
is the motor armature voltage,
R
a
R_{a}
and
L
a
L_{a}
are the armature coil resistance and inductance,
i
a
вҖӢ
(
t
)
i_{a}(t)
is the armature current, and
e
a
вҖӢ
(
t
)
=
K
m
вҖӢ
Пү
m
вҖӢ
(
t
)
{e_{a}(t)=K_{m}\omega_{m}(t)}
is the back electromotive force (EMF) with
K
m
K_{m}
being the motor torque constant and
Пү
m
вҖӢ
(
t
)
\omega_{m}(t)
the motor angular velocity. The motor torque is linearly related to the current as
T
m
вҖӢ
(
t
)
=
K
m
вҖӢ
i
a
вҖӢ
(
t
)
T_{m}(t)=K_{m}i_{a}(t)
.
Mechanical Subsystem
The mechanical part of the system is modelled as a two-mass drive with elastic coupling between the motor and the load, given by
J
m
вҖӢ
Пү
Лҷ
m
вҖӢ
(
t
)
\displaystyle J_{m}\dot{\omega}_{m}(t)
=
T
m
вҖӢ
(
t
)
вҲ’
T
s
вҖӢ
(
t
)
вҲ’
B
m
вҖӢ
Пү
m
вҖӢ
(
t
)
вҲ’
T
f
вҖӢ
(
Пү
m
)
\displaystyle=T_{m}(t)-T_{s}(t)-B_{m}\omega_{m}(t)-T_{f}(\omega_{m})
J
L
вҖӢ
Пү
Лҷ
L
вҖӢ
(
t
)
\displaystyle J_{L}\dot{\omega}_{L}(t)
=
T
s
вҖӢ
(
t
)
вҲ’
B
L
вҖӢ
Пү
L
вҖӢ
(
t
)
вҲ’
T
d
вҖӢ
(
t
)
вҲ’
T
f
вҖӢ
(
Пү
L
)
\displaystyle=T_{s}(t)-B_{L}\omega_{L}(t)-T_{d}(t)-T_{f}(\omega_{L})
where
J
m
J_{m}
and
J
L
J_{L}
are the moment of inertia of the motor and load,
B
m
B_{m}
and
B
L
B_{L}
are viscous friction coefficients, and
T
d
вҖӢ
(
t
)
T_{d}(t)
is the external disturbance torque. The coupling torque
T
s
вҖӢ
(
t
)
T_{s}(t)
between motor and load is modelled as
T
s
вҖӢ
(
t
)
=
k
s
вҖӢ
\ab
вҖӢ
(
Оё
m
вҖӢ
(
t
)
вҲ’
Оё
L
вҖӢ
(
t
)
)
+
B
s
вҖӢ
\ab
вҖӢ
(
Пү
m
вҖӢ
(
t
)
вҲ’
Пү
L
вҖӢ
(
t
)
)
T_{s}(t)=k_{s}\ab(\theta_{m}(t)-\theta_{L}(t))+B_{s}\ab(\omega_{m}(t)-\omega_{L}(t))
where
k
s
k_{s}
and
B
s
B_{s}
are the shaft stiffness and damping coefficients. Moreover,
Оё
Лҷ
m
=
Пү
m
\dot{\theta}_{m}=\omega_{m}
, and
Оё
Лҷ
L
=
Пү
L
\dot{\theta}_{L}=\omega_{L}
, respectively.
Nonlinear Friction and Dead-zone Effects
The friction torque is modelled using the Coulomb characteristic,
T
f
вҖӢ
(
Пү
)
=
a
0
вҖӢ
sgn
вҒЎ
(
b
0
вҖӢ
Пү
)
,
T_{f}(\omega)=a_{0}\operatorname{sgn}(b_{0}\omega),
where
a
0
a_{0}
and
b
0
b_{0}
are friction parameters. The dead-zone nonlinearity in the input voltage is modelled as
u
eff
вҖӢ
(
t
)
=
{
0
,
\ab
вҖӢ
|
v
a
вҖӢ
(
t
)
|
<
v
dz
v
a
вҖӢ
(
t
)
вҲ’
sgn
вҒЎ
(
v
a
вҖӢ
(
t
)
)
вҖӢ
v
dz
,
\ab
вҖӢ
|
v
a
вҖӢ
(
t
)
|
вүҘ
v
dz
u_{\text{eff}}(t)=\begin{cases}0,&\ab|v_{a}(t)|<v_{\text{dz}}\\
v_{a}(t)-\operatorname{sgn}(v_{a}(t))\,v_{\text{dz}},&\ab|v_{a}(t)|\geq v_{\text{dz}}\end{cases}
where
v
dz
v_{\text{dz}}
denotes the dead-zone threshold voltage. The
sgn
вҒЎ
(
вӢ…
)
\operatorname{sgn}(\cdot)
is the sign function.
The parameters used in this work are summarised in
Table
I
.
TABLE I
:
DC Motor Parameters
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Armature resistance
R
a
R_{a}
3.3
3.3
\unit
Armature inductance
L
a
L_{a}
2.75
2.75
\unit
\milli
Motor constant
K
m
K_{m}
3.24
Г—
10
вҲ’
2
3.24\text{\times}{10}^{-2}
\unit
\per
Motor inertia
J
m
J_{m}
1.16
Г—
10
вҲ’
4
1.16\text{\times}{10}^{-4}
\unit
\squared
Load inertia
J
L
J_{L}
4.0
Г—
10
вҲ’
4
4.0\text{\times}{10}^{-4}
\unit
\squared
Shaft stiffness
k
s
k_{s}
1.35
1.35
\unit
\per
Viscous friction
B
m
B_{m}
,
B
L
B_{L}
1.0
Г—
10
вҲ’
4
1.0\text{\times}{10}^{-4}
\unit
\per
Dead-zone threshold
v
dz
v_{\text{dz}}
0.4
0.4
\unit
For training the SSM, several trajectories are first gathered by exciting the model with a standard PRBS signal. The measured output is corrupted by zero-mean Gaussian noise with variance
0.02
0.02
.
The architecture depicted in
Fig.
1
is used with a NN consisting of a single hidden layer with
32
32
neurons and leaky ReLU as the activation function, denoted by
рқ’®
u
\mathcal{S}_{u}
, and a linear layer, denoted by
рқ’®
y
\mathcal{S}_{y}
. The slope of the leaky ReLU is constrained between
0.01
0.01
and
1
1
. Note that the bi-Lipschitz bound can be computed after training using the spectral norms of the weight matrices and the slope of the activation function. The system order for the linear recurrent unit is chosen as
n
x
=
8
{n_{x}=8}
,
n
u
ВҜ
=
1
{n_{\bar{u}}=1}
, and
n
y
ВҜ
=
1
{n_{\bar{y}}=1}
.
Fig.
2
shows a validation trajectory generated using the trained SSM.
Figure 2
:
A sample validation trajectory after the training
For the controller synthesis, the Python Control package
[
python-control2021
]
is used to solve the LMIs presented in
Theorems
1
and
2
. The controller and observer pair are implemented on the original nonlinear mathematical model for ten different initial conditions sampled from a uniform distribution between
вҲ’
4
rad
s
вҲ’
1
and
4
rad
s
вҲ’
1
-4\text{\,}\mathrm{rad}\text{\,}{\mathrm{s}}^{-1}4\text{\,}\mathrm{rad}\text{\,}{\mathrm{s}}^{-1}
. The results are presented in
Fig.
3
. The controller and observer demonstrate robustness and stability on the nonlinear mathematical model.
Figure 3
:
Controller response on the nonlinear mathematical model for different initial conditions
V
Conclusions
This paper presents an indirect data-driven controller synthesis for nonlinear systems. First, a nonlinear SysId using an SSM is performed on the systemвҖҷs input-output data, followed by controller synthesis for the learned model. Sufficient controllability and observability conditions for SSMs are established, showing that bi-Lipschitzness of both input lifting and output projection blocks is a sufficient requirement. Key results include
(i)
an LMI-based state-feedback controller ensuring exponential stability
(ii)
a state-observer design guaranteeing asymptotic convergence
(iii)
a discrete-time separation principle using contraction theory.
Future work will focus on integrating the internal model principle to enhance robustness and performance.
References
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA