Solar Cycle Prediction: Challenges, Progress, and Future Perspectives
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
2
Summary of past predictions: Emphasising the challenges
3
The physical mechanism of the solar cycle
4
Dynamo models for the solar cycle prediction
4.1
Kinematic axisymmetric models
4.2
Babcock–Leighton and flux transport dynamo models
5
Surface Flux Transport (SFT) model for prediction
6
Physics of solar cycle prediction
7
Predictions utilizing the polar field at/around the solar minimum
8
Predictions from the dynamo models utilising the polar field
9
What limits the accuracy of the polar field-based predictions?
10
Predictions before the solar minimum: how early can we go?
10.1
Prediction using the growth rate of the polar field
10.2
Prediction using SFT model
11
What limits the prediction beyond one cycle
11.1
Fluctuations in the toroidal to poloidal field generation
11.2
Nonlinearities in the toroidal to poloidal field generation
12
Conclusions and future outlook
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2604.16183v1 [astro-ph.SR] 17 Apr 2026
1
1
institutetext:
B. B. Karak
2
2
institutetext:
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi, India
2
2
email:
karak.phy@iitbhu.ac.in
Solar Cycle Prediction: Challenges, Progress, and Future Perspectives
Bidya Binay Karak
(Received: date / Accepted: date)
Abstract
Reliable prediction of the solar cycle is a formidable challenge, yet it is increasingly vital in our technology-dependent society as solar activity drives space weather.  Various methods, including precursors, nonlinear curve fitting and extrapolation, statistical and Machine Learning (ML) models, and dynamo and surface flux transport (SFT) models, were implemented to predict past cycles.  Analysing about 100 predictions for Solar Cycle 24 and over 130 for Solar Cycle 25, we find that most methods largely failed to predict the peak correctly: Cycle 24 was statistically predicted to be a strong cycle, whereas Cycle 25 was predicted to be a weak cycle. By and large, predictions made only after the cycle began became closer to reality. ML-based models also produced discouraging results. The polar field and its proxy-based predictions are the most physically supported approach to prediction; however, applying them much earlier, before the solar minimum, may yield inaccurate results.  Dynamo models are progressively improving both in understanding and in forecasting; however, they need to improve by accurately assimilating the observed polar field data and additional physics, such as meridional flow variations. Solar dynamo theory, complemented by the SFT model and observations, demonstrates that the prediction of a cycle before the time of its previous cycle’s maximum is meaningless.   The current solar cycle is declining, and the community is now preparing for the prediction of the next cycle. Thus, this review will guide future studies.
†
†
journal:
Reviews of Modern Plasma Physics
Contents
1
Introduction
2
Summary of past predictions: Emphasising the challenges
3
The physical mechanism of the solar cycle
4
Dynamo models for the solar cycle prediction
4.1
Kinematic axisymmetric models
4.2
Babcock–Leighton and flux transport dynamo models
5
Surface Flux Transport (SFT) model for prediction
6
Physics of solar cycle prediction
7
Predictions utilizing the polar field at/around the solar minimum
8
Predictions from the dynamo models utilising the polar field
9
What limits the accuracy of the polar field-based predictions?
10
Predictions before the solar minimum: how early can we go?
10.1
Prediction using the growth rate of the polar field
10.2
Prediction using SFT model
11
What limits the prediction beyond one cycle
11.1
Fluctuations in the toroidal to poloidal field generation
11.2
Nonlinearities in the toroidal to poloidal field generation
12
Conclusions and future outlook
References
1
Introduction
One of the intriguing cycles of nature is the solar cycle, which is the cyclic variation of the magnetic field
(Babcock,
1959
)
. The magnetic field strength of the Sun is observed to oscillate with a period of 11 years, and in every cycle the polarity of the field also flips
(Hathaway,
2015
)
. The strong magnetic field, which is produced in the interior, erupts through the surface in the form of concentrated bipolar magnetic regions (BMRs), the white-light (or intensity continuum) counterpart of these regions being popularly known as sunspots or active regions
(van Driel-Gesztelyi and Green,
2015
)
. The number of sunspots, for which we have fairly systematic records dating back to approximately 1610, also varies over a period of about 11 years, making the solar cycle popularly known as the sunspot cycle
(Schwabe,
1844
)
. It is the magnetic field of the sunspot and decayed active regions, which is quite dynamic and complex, that usually produces energetic events like coronal mass ejections (CMEs) and flares, through which huge amounts of charged particles, radiation, and magnetic field are ejected from the Sun
(Chen,
2011
; Cliver
et al.
,
2022
; Georgoulis
et al.
,
2024
)
. These short-wavelength radiation, energetic particles and magnetic field disturb the space environments around the Sun, including the space around the Earth and other planets, and drive the so-called space weather
(Temmer,
2021
)
. Besides producing the beautiful aurora, space weather causes hazardous effects on us, including (but not limited to) disrupting satellite-based communications, satellite failure, disturbance in GPS communication, power grid failure, impacting astronauts in space, and disturbance in long-distance radio communication
(Schrijver
et al.
,
2015
; Kostarev,
2026
)
. In June 2013, it was estimated that if a similar Carrington event
(a strong space weather event that occurred on Sept 1–2, 1859; Cliver and Dietrich,
2013
)
happens at present, then the cost of damage in the US alone can be as high as $0.6–2.6 trillion
(Schrijver,
2015
)
, emphasising the impacts of space weather effects
(Nandy
et al.
,
2025
)
.
Figure 1:
Variation of the monthly sunspot number (ISSN V2.0; black curve), flare index (blue), and monthly number of coronal mass ejections (SOHO/LASCO CME; orange) as functions of time.
As all these energetic space-weather candidates (CMEs and flares) are produced from the sunspots and decayed active regions, and the number of sunspots has a cyclic variation, we observe a cycle variation of the CMEs and flares in congruence with the sunspot cycle
(McIntosh
et al.
,
2015
)
. Figure
1
shows the variation of the flares and CMEs
overplotted with the number of sunspots for the last two and a half cycles. While there are large fluctuations on a short time scale of about a year, in general we observe that near the solar maximum, when the Sun produces the highest number of sunspots, the numbers of flares and CMEs are also generally high. The geomagnetic disturbances, as quantified by the aa-index variation, also showed a good correlation with the solar cycle
(Chapman
et al.
,
2020
; Hajra
et al.
,
2021
)
. These observations imply that solar maxima are the times when we expect more disturbances in space and vice versa. Hence, the condition of the space around the Sun goes through quiet to violent phases in a cyclic manner with a period of 11 years, coinciding with the sunspot cycle.
However, there is more to this cyclic (predictable) picture, and that becomes apparent when we observe the solar cycle on a long time scale. In Figure
2
, we observe that the solar cycle amplitude had a fairly large variation in the past. There was a time when the Sun produced strong cycles (e.g., during cycles 17–19, called the Modern maximum), and there were times when the Sun produced weak cycles, e.g., during cycles 4–5 (so-called Dalton minima) and even produced Maunder minimum (during 1645 – 1715) when the Sun showed only a few spots for several years
(Usoskin,
2017
; Hayakawa,
2025
)
. While there is a trend, as indicated by an envelope of the so-called Gleissberg cycle with a period of approximately 98 years, the amplitude of the solar cycle varied in quite an irregular fashion
(Biswas
et al.
,
2023b
)
. Extreme space-weather events are more frequent in strong cycles
(Owens
et al.
,
2021
; Karak
et al.
,
2026
)
. These indicate that the level of space weather disturbance (as caused by flares and CMEs) also varies irregularly, leading to a slow, long-term modulation of the space weather condition, also known as the space climate
(Mursula
et al.
,
2007
; Lockwood
et al.
,
2018
)
.
Figure 2:
Solid/black: Yearly variation of the group sunspot number. Dashed/red: Monthly smooth sunspot number (ISSN V2.0). Cycle numbers starting from Cycle 1 are marked near their peaks.
As mentioned earlier, the prediction of the space weather condition well in advance is useful for planning and preparation of future space missions and also to determine the lifetime of satellites in low-Earth orbits
(Oliveira and Zesta,
2019
; Miteva
et al.
,
2023
; Oliveira
et al.
,
2024
; Baruah,
2025
)
. In particular, if we can predict the solar activity level and thus the space climate conditions, say for the next decade, then this is important data for space organisations and satellite companies. Prediction is also useful for constraining the mechanism of the generation of solar magnetic field—the solar dynamo for which various potential models are available but no consensus
(Charbonneau,
2020
; Karak,
2023
)
. However, as seen in Figure
2
, the prediction of the strength of the solar cycle is challenging. The attempt for cycle prediction began at least about 50 years ago when researchers began predicting the amplitude of solar cycle 23
(Schatten
et al.
,
1978
; Joselyn
et al.
,
1997
, and references therein)
. With increasing understandings of the mechanism of the solar cycle and the availability of observed data, solar cycle prediction has become a major branch of solar physics, producing more than 100 research publications just for the prediction of Cycle 24 and about 150 predictions for Cycle 25 according to the Astrophysics Data System
(Petrovay,
2010
; Pesnell,
2012
; Petrovay,
2020
; Nandy,
2021
; Bhowmik
et al.
,
2023
; Miesch,
2025
)
. Existing prediction methods can be broadly categorised into three groups. These include (i) physics-based predictions, employing the underlying physical mechanism working behind the formation of the solar cycle, the solar dynamo, (ii) precursor-based predictions, utilising the feature(s) of the solar cycle that carries (carry) the information of the future, (iii) extrapolation methods, utlizing the pattern of the past cycles and employing some (purely mathematical and Machine Learning models) analysis of the solar activity time series. Keeping in mind that there are excellent review articles
(Petrovay,
2010
; Pesnell,
2012
; Petrovay,
2020
; Nandy,
2021
; Miesch,
2025
)
detailing the prediction methods of solar cycles, here we shall pay special emphasis to the categories (i) and (ii) after reviewing the statistics of the predictions made using all methods. We shall highlight predictions from the past two solar cycles and how they helped improve predictions for future cycles.
Figure 3:
Predicted values of the peak sunspot number for Solar Cycle 24 made by different authors are shown in chronological order. The dashed line marks the observed peak (113.3).
Figure 4:
The same as Figure
3
but for Cycle 25. The dashed line points to the observed peak sunspot number at 161 (13-month smoothed value). The details of the references are listed in Table
LABEL:tab:cyc25
.
2
Summary of past predictions: Emphasising the challenges
In Figures
3
and
4
, we display the predicted sunspot numbers of solar Cycles 24 and 25 made by various authors in chronological order. As most of the predicted values for Cycle 24 were repeatedly referred in previous reviews
(Pesnell,
2012
; Nandy,
2021
)
, they are not cited separately here, although some new predictions are included here which were not cited in previous reviews. However, for Cycle 25, several new predictions have been added to the list and some values have also been corrected. Therefore, for completeness, all predictions made for Cycle 25 up to 2024 are listed in Table
LABEL:tab:cyc25
. The predictions after 2024 are ignored here because by that time it was very clear about the cycle peak based on the increase rate of the cycle. The following inferences can be made from these data.
For solar Cycle 24 (Figure
3
):
(i) No consensus on the predicted values.
(ii) The range of the predictions is quite large, going from less than 50 to as high as 260.
(iii) The mean (
μ
\mu
) and the standard deviation (
σ
\sigma
) are 105.88 and 29.97, respectively. Thus, the observed value
1
1
1
Several cycles, including Cycle 24, display multiple peaks
(Karak
et al.
,
2018a
)
. Therefore, assigning a number to the peak of a cycle is subjective, but we take the highest peak value as obtained from the 13-month smoothed ISSN V2.0 data, which is also commonly used in the literature to measure the strength of the cycle.
(113.3) significantly deviates from the mean.
(iv)
The predictions made in 2009, the end of the cycle, are in no way superior to those made earlier, implying that even waiting a few more years did not improve the predictions much.
Now, for Cycle 25 (Figure
4
):
(i) Again, there is no good news. Although the number of predictions has increased considerably, there is no consensus on the predicted values. The mean (132.20) is significantly below the observed value (161).
(iii) There is not much improvement in the prediction until the start of the cycle. Only after 2022 (when the cycle has clearly started growing), the values tend to become closer to reality. Even in 2024, when the cycle’s growth rate could reasonably indicate its peak, several prediction methods produced significant deviations.
(iv) Except for the predictions made in 2006–2007, almost all the predictions during 2015–2021 were below the observed ones.
Figure 5:
Distributions (with bin size of 10) of the predicted peak sunspot numbers for the solar Cycles 24 (left) and 25 (right). The red/dashed distributions are obtained by ignoring the error of the prediction, while the filled/grey ones are obtained by considering the error (see text for more details). Here, as well as for the previous two figures, predictions made on and before 2015 are scaled up by a factor of
1.43
±
0.1
1.43\pm 0.1
as given in
Nandy (
2021
)
to conform to the new version V2.0 from V1.0
(Clette
et al.
,
2014
)
. The vertical lines represent the actual/observed values: 113 for Cycle 24 and 161 for Cycle 25.
To obtain a clearer view of the predictive performance over the past two cycles, we plot the distributions of predicted sunspots. If we ignore the error ranges (which are not provided in all prediction publications), then the distribution is computed based on the occurrence frequency in each bin of size 10, which is shown by the red/dashed lines in Figure
5
. However, if we want to consider the error ranges, there are many ways to construct the distribution. The way we compute it is the following. For predictions whose error range is unavailable, we set the distribution frequency to 1 in the bin where the predicted sunspot number falls. However, for predictions having an error range, we obtain the frequency by assuming a Gaussian distribution with the predicted value as the mean and the error as
σ
\sigma
. Grey/filled regions show this distribution in Figure
5
.
From this figure, we see that Cycle 24 was statistically predicted to be a strong cycle, while Cycle 25 was predicted to be a weak cycle.
In addition, the spread of the distribution of Cycle 25 is not reduced significantly compared to Cycle 24. It is pretty frustrating that even after a decade of research, our understanding of solar cycle prediction has not improved, clearly demonstrating the difficulties in the problem.
Now we shall move on to the physics of solar cycle and its predictability.
3
The physical mechanism of the solar cycle
To understand the physics of solar cycle prediction, we shall first discuss the physical mechanism governing the solar cycle, the dynamo.
The solar cycle is governed by a process called the dynamo, in which the kinetic energy of the plasma amplifies and maintains the magnetic energy against its diffusion through turbulent flow
(Moffatt,
1978
; Charbonneau and Sokoloff,
2023
)
. The differential motion (large-scale longitudinal flow) of the Sun generates a strong toroidal field by shearing a weak poloidal field in the solar convection zone. The toroidal field becomes intermittent, forming flux tube-like structures within the convection zone.
These tubes become buoyant, rise up to the surface to erupt as sunspots (technically, the bipolar magnetic regions), which eventually decay and disperse to generate a poloidal field of opposite polarity (with respect to the existing field). This poloidal field first cancels the old field and continues to grow to form the polar field
2
2
2
The polar field is the radial component of the poloidal field measured near the polar regions.
for the next cycle, which eventually produces a toroidal field of opposite polarity. The toroidal field again produces sunspots and continues the cyclic process. While the fundamental mechanisms behind this cyclic dynamo process were presented in several historic publications
(Parker,
1955
,
1975
,
1979
; Babcock,
1961
; Leighton,
1964
,
1969
)
, researchers have offered various pieces of observational evidence and theoretical investigations over the past few decades, which, when combined, allow us to confirm the basic process underlying the solar cycle
(Cameron and Schüssler,
2023
)
. Some of these key contributions and observations are listed below.
Figure 6:
The variations of the polar field (top plots, a measure of the poloidal magnetic field of the Sun) and the (13-month smoothed) sunspot number (bottom plot), a measure of the toroidal field strength. Note the polar field peaks around solar minima and reverses during solar maxima.
Figure 7:
Top panel: Butterfly diagram of sunspot group obtained from Royal Greenwich Observatory(RGO)/NOAA. Middle: Longitude-average azimuthal magnetic field (data source: Wilcox Solar Observatory, WSO).
Bottom: Longitude-averaged radial field (data from WSO).
Note the proximity between the sunspot and the toroidal field, respectively, in the top two panels, and the phase lag of the poloidal field (bottom), becoming maximum when the sunspot/toroidal field goes to a minimum. Figure reproduced from
Cameron and Schüssler (
2023
)
with permission from authors.
Figure 8:
Dashed lines: The observed magnetic flux on the solar surface (red: north, blue: south) derived from Kitt Peak synoptic magnetograms. Solid lines: The computed net toroidal flux using the observed polar field and the differential rotation. Reproduced from
Cameron and Schüssler (
2015
)
with permission from authors.
(i) The observed polar magnetic field and sunspot number, which is produced from the toroidal field, are observed to oscillate out of phase as shown in Figure
6
. In addition, the weak diffuse radial field and the toroidal field at low latitudes are measured, which for the last four cycles are shown in Figure
7
. In this figure, we observe that these two fields oscillate in a cyclic manner; the polar field is becoming strong at the solar minimum, whereas the toroidal field becomes prominent at the times of solar maxima. The polarity of these fields flips every 11-year cycle.
(ii) The differential rotation in the entire SCZ has been known for the last several decades
(Schou
et al.
,
1998
)
. Thus, one can compute the toroidal flux generated from the observed polar field through shearing by the differential rotation
(Cameron and Schüssler,
2015
)
, and this value is indeed in good agreement with the observed toroidal flux (Figure
8
). In addition, the observed polar flux
(Choudhuri
et al.
,
2007
; Kumar
et al.
,
2021b
,
2022
)
and its proxies, such as the A(t)-index
(Makarov
et al.
,
2001
)
, polar faculae
(Sheeley,
1991
; Muñoz-Jaramillo
et al.
,
2013
)
, and polar network counts
(Priyal
et al.
,
2014
; Mishra
et al.
,
2025
)
, the geomagnetic aa-index
(Wang and Sheeley,
2009
)
, around the solar minimum, show a strong correlation with the amplitude of the next cycle. These suggest that the poloidal field is the source of the next sunspot cycle.
(iii) The observed magnetic field in BMRs and active regions shows a general rule known as Hale’s law
(Hale
et al.
,
1919
; Hale and Nicholson,
1925
)
. According to this, the leading spots or poles of BMRs (located at higher longitudes) have the same magnetic polarity within a cycle and in a hemisphere. This polarity pattern alternates between hemispheres and cycles.
These feature of active regions/BMRs, complemented with the observed toroidal flux and its proximity to the observed latitudinal distribution of sunspots (Figure
7
), implies that the BMRs are the buoyant structures of the rising toroidal flux systems arising from the deep CZ.
One mysterious feature of the solar cycle is its systematic increase in the tilt with the latitude–Joy’s law
(Hale
et al.
,
1919
)
, for which the thin flux tube model, employing the effect of Coriolis force on the rising magnetic flux tube, provides a solid explanation
(D’Silva and Choudhuri,
1993
; Fan
et al.
,
1993
; Caligari
et al.
,
1995
)
. By systematically observing the tilt of a large number of BMRs (over two solar cycles), starting from their early emergence on the solar surface,
Sreedevi
et al.
(
2023
,
2024
,
2025
)
showed that BMRs display tilt according to Joy’s law from the time of their emergence on the solar surface, as seen in the magnetograms, supporting the theory of Joy’s law tilt; however see,
Schunker
et al.
(
2020
)
for an alternative views.
(iv) Surface flux transport (SFT) models
(Wang
et al.
,
1989a
,
b
)
and dynamo simulations
(Karak,
2024
)
, complemented by observations
(Cameron
et al.
,
2013
; Mordvinov
et al.
,
2020
,
2022
)
, demonstrate that due to their finite tilt, when BMRs decay and disperse, they produce a net poloidal field as proposed by
Babcock (
1961
)
and
Leighton (
1964
)
. Observations also show that the flux, tilt angle, and the latitude position of the BMRs in a cycle primarily determine the polar flux generated at the end of that cycle
(Kitchatinov and Olemskoy,
2011b
; Dasi-Espuig
et al.
,
2010
; Muñoz-Jaramillo
et al.
,
2013
; Dey
et al.
,
2025
)
. The meridional flow plays a crucial role in the generation and transport of the poloidal field in the way it is observed on the surface of the Sun
(Baumann
et al.
,
2004
; Vashishth and Karak,
2024
)
, and the good thing about it is that this flow exists unambiguously
(Hanasoge,
2022
)
.
There are, of course, several processes, including the equator-ward migration of the sunspot band, the formation of sunspots from the toroidal field, whose mechanisms are less constrained through observations; in this review, we refrain from discussing them
(however see, Nandy and Choudhuri,
2002
; Fan,
2021
; Karak
et al.
,
2026
)
, and now we move to the detailed modelling part of the solar dynamo.
4
Dynamo models for the solar cycle prediction
The magnetic field that we discussed above, namely, the observed poloidal and toroidal fields and the fields of sunspots and BMRs are of large-scale or global
3
3
3
In contrast to the local or small-scale dynamo, the length- and time-scales of the generated magnetic field in the large-scale dynamo is much larger than that of the driver—the convective flow.
type, that are often studied through the mean-field dynamo.
In the models for mean-field dynamo, one is interested in obtaining the large-scale magnetic field, by modelling the small-scale magnetic and velocity fields using suitable approximations
(see Krause and Rädler,
1980
, for an in-depth discussion of the mean-field electrodynamics)
. In this model, we solve the following form of the Induction equation,
∂
𝑩
¯
∂
t
=
∇
×
(
𝒗
¯
×
𝑩
¯
+
α
​
𝑩
¯
−
η
t
​
(
∇
×
𝑩
¯
)
)
.
\frac{\partial\bm{\overline{B}}}{\partial t}=\bm{\nabla}\times\left(\bm{\overline{v}}\times\bm{\overline{B}}+\alpha\bm{\overline{B}}-\eta_{t}(\bm{\nabla}\times\bm{\overline{B}})\right).
(1)
Here,
𝒗
¯
\bm{\overline{v}}
is the mean (axisymmetric) velocity field, arising from the meridional circulation, which gives the radial and latitudinal velocity components and the differential rotation, giving the longitudinal flow. The
α
\alpha
is the
α
\alpha
effect which comes from the non-zero helicity in the flows, and in the classical
α
​
Ω
\alpha\rm\Omega
model, it is this term that is responsible for generating poloidal field from the toroidal one. The
η
t
\eta_{t}
is the turbulent diffusivity, which is much larger than the molecular one and thus the latter is ignored in the above equation.
Ideally, one needs to solve a dynamical equation for the mean/large-scale velocity
𝒗
¯
\bm{\overline{v}}
, which includes the back reactions of the large-scale and the small-scale magnetic fields
(e.g., Eq. 4 of Karak,
2023
)
. However, this equation again involves the parameterisation of the small-scale turbulence and magnetic fluctuations (e.g., through the
Λ
\Lambda
effect and turbulent viscosity) and requires turbulence model
(see, e.g., Kippenhahn,
1963
; Ruediger,
1989
; Kichatinov and Rudiger,
1993
; Kitchatinov and Olemskoy,
2011a
)
. Fortunately, we have some knowledge of the
𝒗
¯
\bm{\overline{v}}
from the observations. The differential rotation has been measured on the solar surface for more than a century and in the entire convection zone for several decades, and these observations also show that it varies only a little (in the form of torsional oscillation, which is less than 0.5%)
(Gilman and Howard,
1984
; Howe,
2009
; Jha
et al.
,
2021
)
. The meridional component of the flow is known on the solar surface through observations, while its profile in the deeper convection zone is guided through MHD modelling and global convection simulations
(Kitchatinov,
2016
; Choudhuri,
2021
; Karak
et al.
,
2015a
,
2014b
; Featherstone and Miesch,
2015
; Karak
et al.
,
2018b
)
, supported by limited observations
(Gizon
et al.
,
2020
)
. Therefore, without solving the equation for
𝒗
¯
\bm{\overline{v}}
, one can specify its value through the observed (and guided by observations and modelling) meridional and differential rotation, which is the essence of the kinematic dynamo model.
4.1
Kinematic axisymmetric models
In a kinematic dynamo, we specify the large-scale flow and solve the equation of the large-scale magnetic field to study the dynamo mechanism. The kinematic approach is not a bad prescription for the Sun, as recent evidence suggests that the solar dynamo is not highly supercritical
(Metcalfe
et al.
,
2016
,
2025
; Karak
et al.
,
2015b
; Kitchatinov and Nepomnyashchikh,
2017
; Ghosh
et al.
,
2024
; Wavhal
et al.
,
2025
)
, and thus the nonlinearity is not too strong to significantly influence the flow. Furthermore, the large-scale poloidal magnetic field, the solar corona during minima, and the large-scale flows are all observed to be predominantly axisymmetric
(Charbonneau,
2020
; Choudhuri,
2021
)
, motivating modellers to consider an axisymmetric approximation in which the fields are written in the following forms.
𝑩
¯
=
𝑩
𝐩
+
𝑩
𝐭
=
∇
×
[
A
​
(
r
,
θ
,
t
)
​
ϕ
^
]
+
B
​
(
r
,
θ
,
t
)
​
ϕ
^
,
\bm{\overline{B}}=\bm{B_{\rm p}}+\bm{B_{\rm t}}=\mbox{$\nabla$}\times\left[A(r,\theta,t)\bm{\hat{\phi}}\right]+B(r,\theta,t)\bm{\hat{\phi}},
(2)
where
A
A
is the potential for the poloidal field:
𝑩
𝐩
\bm{B_{\rm p}}
, which includes
B
r
​
(
r
,
θ
,
t
)
B_{r}(r,\theta,t)
and
B
θ
​
(
r
,
θ
,
t
)
B_{\theta}(r,\theta,t)
components of the magnetic field, and
B
​
(
r
,
θ
,
t
)
B(r,\theta,t)
is the toroidal component.
On the same footing, the velocity field can be written as
𝒗
¯
​
(
r
,
θ
)
=
𝒗
𝐦
​
(
r
,
θ
)
+
v
ϕ
​
(
r
,
θ
)
​
ϕ
^
=
v
r
​
(
r
,
θ
)
​
𝒓
^
+
v
θ
​
(
r
,
θ
)
​
𝜽
^
+
r
​
sin
⁡
θ
​
Ω
​
(
r
,
θ
)
​
ϕ
^
,
\bm{\overline{v}}(r,\theta)=\bm{v_{\rm m}}(r,\theta)+v_{\phi}(r,\theta)\bm{\hat{\phi}}=v_{r}(r,\theta)\bm{\hat{r}}+v_{\theta}(r,\theta)\bm{\hat{\theta}}+r\sin\theta{\rm\Omega}(r,\theta)\bm{\hat{\phi}},
(3)
where
𝒗
𝐦
=
v
r
​
(
r
,
θ
)
​
𝒓
^
+
v
θ
​
(
r
,
θ
)
​
𝜽
^
\bm{v_{\rm m}}=v_{r}(r,\theta)\bm{\hat{r}}+v_{\theta}(r,\theta)\bm{\hat{\theta}}
is the meridional circulation and
Ω
​
(
r
,
θ
)
{\rm\Omega}(r,\theta)
is the angular frequency.
With these forms of magnetic and velocity fields, one can derive the following equations for the poloidal and toroidal components.
∂
A
∂
t
+
1
s
​
(
𝒗
𝒎
⋅
∇
)
​
(
s
​
A
)
=
η
t
​
(
∇
2
−
1
s
2
)
​
A
+
α
​
B
,
\frac{\partial A}{\partial t}+\frac{1}{s}(\bm{v_{m}}\cdot\mbox{$\nabla$})(sA)=\eta_{t}\left(\nabla^{2}-\frac{1}{s^{2}}\right)A+\alpha B,
(4)
∂
B
∂
t
+
1
r
​
[
∂
(
r
​
v
r
​
B
)
∂
r
+
∂
(
v
θ
​
B
)
∂
θ
]
=
η
t
​
(
∇
2
−
1
s
2
)
​
B
+
s
​
(
𝑩
𝒑
⋅
∇
)
​
Ω
+
1
r
​
d
​
η
t
d
​
r
​
∂
(
r
​
B
)
∂
r
,
\frac{\partial B}{\partial t}+\frac{1}{r}\left[\frac{\partial(rv_{r}B)}{\partial r}+\frac{\partial(v_{\theta}B)}{\partial\theta}\right]=\eta_{t}\left(\nabla^{2}-\frac{1}{s^{2}}\right)B+s(\bm{B_{p}}\cdot\mbox{$\nabla$}){\rm\Omega}+\frac{1}{r}\frac{d\eta_{t}}{dr}\frac{\partial(rB)}{\partial r},
(5)
where
s
=
r
​
sin
⁡
θ
s=r\sin{\theta}
and
η
t
\eta_{t}
is assumed to depend only on
r
r
.
In the above Equation (
4
), the source for the poloidal field is the
α
\alpha
effect, while in Equation (
5
), it is the non-uniform rotation (second term on the RHS)—the
Ω
\rm\Omega
effect. We note that the above equations formally describe the
α
​
Ω
\alpha\rm\Omega
model for the Sun (we have neglected a term
ϕ
^
⋅
[
∇
×
(
α
​
𝑩
𝒑
)
]
\bm{\hat{\phi}}\cdot[\mbox{$\nabla$}\times(\alpha\bm{B_{p}})]
in the derivation of above equations, which causes toroidal field generation from the poloidal field through the
α
\alpha
effect).
4.2
Babcock–Leighton and flux transport dynamo models
As discussed in Section
3
, the poloidal field in the Sun is generated through the decay of tilted active regions and BMRs. The dynamo models that consider this process for the generation of poloidal field are popularly known as the Babcock–Leighton dynamo models. Historically, this Babcock–Leighton process, in the axisymmetric models, was captured by adding a term
α
\alpha
which is non-zero near the surface and in latitudes where active regions are observed. Essentially, by replacing
α
​
B
\alpha B
term in Equation (
4
) with
α
B
​
L
​
(
r
,
θ
)
​
B
B
​
C
​
Z
​
(
θ
)
,
\alpha_{BL}(r,\theta)B_{BCZ}(\theta),
(where
B
B
​
C
​
Z
B_{BCZ}
is the toroidal field at or around the base of the CZ) various models were developed
(Choudhuri
et al.
,
1995
; Dikpati and Charbonneau,
1999
; Chatterjee
et al.
,
2004
; Guerrero
et al.
,
2009
; Karak and Petrovay,
2013
)
; also see reviews of
Karak
et al.
(
2014a
)
and
Hazra
et al.
(
2023
)
.
In recent years, the Babcock–Leighton process has been captured more realistically by placing toroidal flux tubes from the base of CZ through flow perturbations
(Yeates and Muñoz-Jaramillo,
2013
; Kumar
et al.
,
2019
)
or by depositing BMRs explicitly on the solar surface based on the toroidal field at the base of the CZ
(Miesch and Dikpati,
2014
; Miesch and Teweldebirhan,
2016
; Hazra and Miesch,
2014
)
.
Usually these Babcock–Leighton dynamo models include a meridional circulation, which is pole-ward near the surface (with a speed of about 20 m s
-1
peaking near mid latitude) and equator-ward at the base of the CZ of speed about a few m s
-1
(Wang
et al.
,
1991
; Hazra
et al.
,
2014
)
. This meridional flow advects the toroidal field at the base of the CZ from high to low latitude, which causes equator-ward migration in the toroidal field (or proxy of sunspots) in these models. The meridional circulation also helps generate a poloidal field by efficiently transporting the leading polarity fluxes of BMRs towards the poles
(Wang
et al.
,
1989a
)
. We emphasise that although meridional circulation plays an important role in Babcock–Leighton dynamo models, and thus they are also named flux transport dynamo models, any dynamo model in which the meridional circulation is the primary mechanism of the flux transport is called the flux transport dynamo model
(Charbonneau,
2020
)
.
5
Surface Flux Transport (SFT) model for prediction
The magnetic field on the solar surface is observed to be dominated by the radial component
(Wang and Sheeley,
1992
)
, which is an important component of the poloidal field and acts as the seed for the next sunspot cycle. Hence, the spatial and temporal evolution of the radial magnetic field on the solar surface helps to understand the generation of the poloidal field — the Babcock–Leighton process. In the SFT model, the radial magnetic field that acts as a passive scalar field is evolved through the following equation
(Yeates
et al.
,
2023
)
.
∂
B
r
∂
t
+
∇
⋅
(
𝒖
h
​
B
r
)
=
η
t
​
∇
2
B
r
+
S
​
(
θ
,
ϕ
,
t
)
,
\frac{\partial B_{r}}{\partial t}+\bm{\nabla}\cdot(\bm{u}_{h}B_{r})=\eta_{t}\nabla^{2}B_{r}+S(\theta,\phi,t),
(6)
where,
𝒖
h
\bm{u}_{h}
is the steady (axisymmetric) horizontal surface flow that includes the meridional flow (
v
θ
​
(
R
⊙
,
θ
)
​
𝜽
^
v_{\theta}(R_{\odot},\theta)\bm{\hat{\theta}}
) and the differential rotation (
R
⊙
​
sin
⁡
θ
​
Ω
​
(
R
⊙
,
θ
)
​
ϕ
^
R_{\odot}\sin\theta\ {\rm\Omega}(R_{\odot},\theta)\bm{\hat{\phi}}
). The
η
t
\eta_{t}
is the turbulent diffusivity, and
S
​
(
θ
,
ϕ
,
t
)
S(\theta,\phi,t)
is the term that represents the deposition of BMRs. As the plasma flow, diffusivity and the magnetic field of BMRs are all reasonably measured on the solar surface, the SFT model has proven success in reproducing the evolution of the surface magnetic field (Figure
9
). In the past, various SFT models have been used to reconstruct the historical magnetic field utilising the sunspot group observations
(Jiang
et al.
,
2011
; Yeates
et al.
,
2025
; Jha
et al.
,
2025
; Chatterjee and Hazra,
2026
)
and for the prediction of the solar cycle
(Iijima
et al.
,
2017
; Jiang
et al.
,
2018b
; Upton and Hathaway,
2018a
; Bhowmik and Nandy,
2018
; Biswas
et al.
,
2023a
)
, which we discuss in the next section. We note that the 3D dynamo model, STABLE, also captures the essence of the SFT model, as this dynamo model includes BMRs as the source for the poloidal field and realistically models the surface radial field
(Miesch and Teweldebirhan,
2016
; Hazra
et al.
,
2017
)
.
Figure 9:
The surface radial magnetic field obtained from a SFT model of
Wang
et al.
(
2025
)
(bottom) and the observed field from the Helioseismic
and Magnetic Imager on board the Solar Dynamics Observatory (HMI/SDO; bottom). The figure reproduced with permissions from authors.
6
Physics of solar cycle prediction
Already from the observed variation of the polar magnetic field and the sunspot number, as shown in Figure
6
, we find a close correspondence between the strength of the polar field, which becomes strong at the solar minima, and the amplitude of the next cycle, which peaks after about 6 years. Further, the peaks of the polar field at/around solar minima show a strong correlation with the amplitude of the next solar cycle. This causal connection is also supported by the Babcock–Leighton dynamo model discussed above; see also Equation (
4
). In this scenario, the polar flux is wound by a steady differential rotation inside the convection zone, which emerges as the sunspots for the next cycle (Section
3
for more details). We note that the strong correlation/dependency of the toroidal field on the previous polar field is insensitive to the details of the dynamo model
(Charbonneau and Barlet,
2011
; Kumar
et al.
,
2021a
; Li
et al.
,
2026
)
. Any dynamo model, including the non-Babcock–Leighton type models, has this predictive capability using the poloidal field. However, the delay between the poloidal and sunspot is determined by the flux transport process, and thus depends on the model parameters
(Jiang
et al.
,
2007
; Yeates
et al.
,
2008
; Karak and Nandy,
2012
)
. In Babcock–Leighton models, the transport of the field is largely due to the meridional flow (unless the diffusivity is too strong), which sets the correct time delay of about 5 years between the polar field and the peak of the toroidal field
(Yeates
et al.
,
2008
)
. The toroidal to sunspot process is anyway short
(Jouve
et al.
,
2010
)
, as the buoyant rise of the toroidal flux tubes occurs on a time scale of months and does not contribute to the poloidal to toroidal timescale.
7
Predictions utilizing the polar field at/around the solar minimum
The physics-inspired strong correlation between the observed polar field (or its proxy) at the solar minima and the amplitude of the next cycle allowed researchers to predict the amplitude of the solar cycle. The first prediction in this method was made by
Schatten
et al.
(
1978
)
for Cycle 21, followed by the predictions of
Schatten (
2005
)
,
Svalgaard
et al.
(
2005
)
,
Jiang
et al.
(
2007
)
, and
Pishkalo (
2010
)
for Cycle 24, and
Pesnell and Schatten (
2018
)
,
Svalgaard (
2020
)
,
Janssens (
2021
)
and
Kumar
et al.
(
2021b
)
for Cycle 25 (more in Section
12
). All these predictions were not too far from reality. The deviation in the predicted values is primarily due to the use of different polar field (or proxy) data to generate the linear relation and the time at which the polar field/proxy is measured. As this linear relation is not perfect and there is a considerable amount of scatter around it, the uncertainty in the predicted sunspot number is also considerable. To demonstrate how the predicted values corroborate the reality, we show the predicted values of the peaks of the past Cycles 15–22 in Figure
10
, obtained using the linear relation between the polar field at the solar minima and the amplitude of the next sunspot cycle. The large mismatch in some of the cycles suggests that one needs to carefully estimate the polar field at the solar minimum or there is additional (missing) physics involved in this process.
Figure 10:
Predicted peaks of the sunspot cycles, marked by the dots, using the observed correlation between the polar field/proxy and the peak sunspot number. Error ranges are taken as one
σ
\sigma
deviation of the linear regression. Polar field data is homogenised using the WSO polar field measurements for Cycles 23–24 and A(t) index for Cycles 15–22
(Makarov
et al.
,
2001
)
.
8
Predictions from the dynamo models utilising the polar field
Instead of utilizing the observed linear correlation between the polar field at the minimum and the amplitude of the next cycle,
one can employ a dynamo model to predict the sunspot number (or its proxy from the toroidal field) for the next cycle from the observed polar field. This is possible because in the solar dynamo model, as detailed in Section
3
, the polar flux to the toroidal flux (which gives the sunspot for the next cycle) is predictable. Kinematic dynamo models of Babcock–Leighton type were indeed used to predict the strength of the solar cycle by utilising the observed polar field at the solar minimum. The first prediction of this type was made by
Choudhuri
et al.
(
2007
)
, who fed the observed dipole moment of Cycles 20–24, computed from the Wilcox Solar Observatory (WSO) and Mount Wilson Observatory (MWO), into their flux transport dynamo model to model Cycles 21–23 and predict Cycle 24. Later,
Jiang
et al.
(
2007
)
used the radial field from WSO measurements to improve the prediction. For the current solar cycle, a similar approach was made by
Guo
et al.
(
2021
)
. These predictions are closer to those made simply using the linear correlation between the polar field and the amplitude of the next sunspot cycle.
We note that the predicted values from these two methods, although based on the same physics, may not necessarily be the same. There is a weak memory of the polar field that can be propagated from one cycle to the next (detailed presentation of this in Section
11
.) It is not easy to answer whether the use of a dynamo model improves the prediction of the polar field. However, as the Sun’s polar field has a weak memory, and if it is captured correctly in a dynamo model, then the dynamo model can undoubtedly do a better job. Dynamo-based prediction also has the advantage of capturing the variation of the meridional circulation, which is observed on the solar surface. Research shows that a change in the deep meridional circulation can lead to a significant variation in the strength of the predicted toroidal flux
(Yeates
et al.
,
2008
; Karak,
2010
; Karak and Choudhuri,
2011
; Vashishth and Karak,
2024
)
, emphasising the need to capture the variation of the deep meridional circulation in prediction models.
Hazra and Choudhuri (
2019
)
captured this variation by embedding the decay rate of the previous cycle
(which they argued is due to the variation of meridional circulation; Hazra
et al.
,
2015
)
, into the polar field and predicted the amplitude of solar cycle 25. As their predicted value is closer to reality compared to the sole polar field-based prediction, we tend to accept the need for capturing the variation of meridional circulation in the dynamo model for better prediction of the solar cycle. Another advantage of dynamo-based prediction is that it allows us to predict the full profile of the predicted sunspot cycle. In contrast, the polar field correlation-based prediction only predicts the amplitude of the next cycle, and additional information–such as the Waldmeier law–is required to construct the full profile.
9
What limits the accuracy of the polar field-based predictions?
Now we discuss why we cannot accurately predict the amplitude of the cycle using the polar field at/around the minimum.
The first obvious answer to this question is the uncertainty in measuring the polar field. Due to the line-of-sight effect, any measurements of the polar regions are highly compromised. Even if we have reliable measurements of the magnetic field in the polar regions, we have uncertainties in defining the time of the polar field for the prediction, whether it is the solar minimum or at an earlier or later time. Studies show that the polar field indeed starts to exhibit a strong correlation a few years before the solar minimum
(Kumar
et al.
,
2021b
)
, but these studies are based on limited cycles, and it is not possible to uniquely determine the exact time of the polar field to be used for prediction.
The next issue is the limited number of cycles (last four cycles only) for which the polar field measurements are available. From the proxy, we have somewhat longer duration for the polar field, namely the A(t) index of
Makarov
et al.
(
2001
)
is available from cycle 15 to 22, the number of polar faculae
(Muñoz-Jaramillo
et al.
,
2012
)
and the polar active networks
(Priyal
et al.
,
2014
; Mishra
et al.
,
2025
)
are available from cycle 15 to 22. However, all these proxy data are not very accurate and irregular, which causes considerable scatter in the linear relation between the polar field (proxy) at the minimum and the amplitude of the next cycle, resulting in uncertainty in the prediction (Figure
10
).
When it comes to dynamo-based prediction, there are also issues. The first one is the implementation of observed data into the model. The past methods
(e.g., correcting the poloidal field above
0.8
​
R
⊙
0.8R_{\odot}
using the observed surface value at the solar minimum as done in Choudhuri
et al.
,
2007
)
are not satisfactory; however, see
Chatterjee and Hazra (
2026
)
, for a promising method of feeding the observed magnetic field into the 3D dynamo model that can be extended for the cycle prediction.
The second is the not-so-well-constrained parameters of the model (more discussion on this is in Section
11
).
The third is the assumption of the linearity between the polar field and the next cycle strength. Although the observed data of polar field and its proxy show a ‘reasonable’ linear trend, a weak nonlinearity and stochastic components cannot be ignored
(Biswas
et al.
,
2022
)
. This departure from a perfect linear trend could be due to considerable variation in shear, as found in helioseismic observations
(Antia
et al.
,
2008
)
.
Finally, we have the variation in the meridional flow, of which the surface observations indeed show some variation
(González Hernández
et al.
,
2006
,
2010
; Gizon and Rempel,
2008
; Basu and Antia,
2010
; Hathaway and Rightmire,
2010
)
.
In the Babcock–Leighton dynamo model, in addition to transporting the fields, meridional circulation also affects the strength of the field. Strong flow can also drag the leading polarity flux to the poles, reducing the efficiency of polar field generation
(Vashishth and Karak,
2024
)
. Furthermore, strong meridional flow transports the magnetic field fast in the deep CZ, allowing the diffusion to reduce its strength
(Yeates
et al.
,
2008
; Karak,
2010
)
. Thus, any temporal variation in meridional flow can potentially limit the predictability of the polar field
(Upton and Hathaway,
2014
; Hazra and Choudhuri,
2019
)
.
10
Predictions before the solar minimum: how early can we go?
As discussed above, the usual ‘landmark’ of the solar cycle prediction is the preceding solar minimum, when the polar field has reached its maximum value or has stopped growing. However, predicting the solar cycle even before the solar minimum is always demanding, and for this, we need to estimate the polar field strength before the end of the cycle. It is the decay of the BMRs that produces the polar field for the next cycle. The BMRs from about the first half of a cycle are used to cancel the existing polar field (of the previous cycle), and the remaining BMRs are spent to generate the polar field for the next cycle, which we need for the prediction. Hence, we have two options: the first one is to wait for a few more years after the solar maximum (i.e., to pass the solar maximum epoch unambiguously) to entirely cancel the previous polar field and observe how the polar field for the next cycle is growing. The rate of growth of the polar field can indicate the next cycle. Another option is to replicate the remaining half of the cycle after it has started decaying, using an identical cycle from the past, or simply fill up the remaining half using a synthetic cycle. Both of these options were taken by the prediction community and we elaborate on them below.
Figure 11:
Linear (Pearson’s) correlation coefficient between the polar field (or proxy) at different times
τ
\rm\tau
measured forward from the time of reversal and the peak sunspot area of the next cycle. Note
τ
=
0
\tau=0
corresponds to the time of polar field reversal. Vertical dashed lines of different colour mark the time shift from the reversal of the polar field (or proxy) to the cycle minimum.
Kumar
et al.
(
2021b
)
for more details.
10.1
Prediction using the growth rate of the polar field
After the solar maximum, if we wait for another 2–3 years, then one can get an indication of the strength of the solar cycle by measuring how rapidly the polar field is growing.
Kumar
et al.
(
2021b
)
showed that we do not have to wait until the solar minimum to make a prediction of the next cycle; even after about 4 years of the reversal, the polar field begins to correlate with the amplitude of the next cycle, as shown in Figure
11
. This means that one can even make a prediction about 2-3 years before the solar minimum, the usual landmark when the polar field reaches to its peak.  Later, after careful analysis of the rise rate of the polar field, computed from two-year data after one year of reversal,
Kumar
et al.
(
2022
)
demonstrated that the rise rate reasonably determines the amplitude of the polar field and thus the strength of the next cycle. They had shown the robustness of their results using the Babcock–Leighton type dynamo model and the SFT model with synthetic solar cycles and observed variations in BMR properties
(Biswas
et al.
,
2023a
)
. They further showed that the prediction based on the Waldmeier effect — strong cycles rise faster than the weaker ones
(Waldmeier,
1935
; Cameron and Schüssler,
2008
)
— coincides with the prediction based on the rise rate of the polar field. It is really exciting to see that their prediction is not too far from the reality as presented in Figure
12
; also see Figure 2 of
Kumar
et al.
(
2022
)
for details. Although encouraging, the polar field growth-based early prediction of the solar cycle cannot be as accurate as the prediction based on the polar field at the solar minimum, due to the irregularities involved in the polar field generation process, and there may be some ambiguity in determining the time of reversal for some cycles
(Mordvinov
et al.
,
2022
; Golubeva
et al.
,
2023
; Jha and Upton,
2024
)
; more on this is in Sec 12.
Figure 12:
The predicted value of the Cycle 25 (red curve) using the rise rate of the previous polar field (till 2016) as proposed in
Kumar
et al.
(
2022
)
and its comparison with the observed sunspot data (black and green curves, updated on March 2026). The predictions based on the rise rate of the sunspot cycle (the Waldmeier effect) are shown with filled squares.
10.2
Prediction using SFT model
As shown by
Waldmeier (
1935
); Hathaway (
2015
); Cameron and Schüssler (
2016
); Karak
et al.
(
2026
)
, the declining phase of the solar cycle is largely cycle-independent. Hence, once the activity level starts to fall, the remaining portion of a cycle can be reasonably reconstructed using the properties of past cycles.
Hathaway (
2015
)
and
Jiang
et al.
(
2018b
)
have given a detailed procedure of how to generate a (synthetic) profile of the solar cycle. They further showed that the prediction of the sunspot group emergence is possible after a cycle has passed about four years into that cycle. Finally, they applied their method for predicting the emergence of sunspot groups for the last two years of Cycle 24, and fed them into their SFT model to predict the amplitude of Cycle 25 by relying on the correlation between the axial dipole moment and the amplitude of the next cycle.
Using a similar method,
Bhowmik and Nandy (
2018
)
independently generated the BMRs with several realizations and observationally-guided variations in their properties for the last 3.25 years of Cycle 24 (the remaining phase of the cycle when they made the prediction) and fed them into their SFT model to predict the polar field at the end of the cycle. Subsequently, they had assimilated the magnetic field from their SFT model into an axisymmetric dynamo model, through which they predicted the toroidal flux for the next cycle.
Labonville
et al.
(
2019
)
took a similar path but they used a data-driven coupled
2
×
2
2\times 2
D flux transport dynamo model to predict the amplitude of Cycle 25 a few years before the solar minimum.
Fundamentally, the prediction methods of
Jiang
et al.
(
2018b
)
and
Bhowmik and Nandy (
2018
)
are, by and large, similar, and their predictions are close to each other. A slightly better match of the former model could be due to different parameters in their SFT models and the different process of translating the polar field into the next cycle amplitude. However, a considerably lower value of the predicted sunspots for Cycle 25 in
Labonville
et al.
(
2019
)
could be due to optimisation of the parameters, which was based on the observed data for cycles 23-24.
Figure 13:
The scatter plot between the peak of the polar field at cycle
n
n
versus the amplitude of cycle
n
n
(a),
n
+
1
n+1
(b),
n
+
2
n+2
(c), and
n
+
2
n+2
(d). The cycle number (
n
n
) corresponding to each point is labelled next to it. The cycle amplitude is obtained from the calibrated group area of
Mandal
et al.
(
2020
)
. Here, the polar field is obtained from the A(t) index of
Makarov
et al.
(
2001
)
for cycles 15–22 and WSO for cycles 23–24, scaled appropriately to bring it to the A(t) value.
11
What limits the prediction beyond one cycle
From the discussion in the previous section, we learned that only after a few years of the solar maximum we can reasonably predict the amplitude of the next cycle by reconstructing the BMR properties for the remaining cycle or simply by measuring the growth rate of the polar field. The more time we spend in a cycle, the less uncertainty there will be in the polar field (due to less uncertainty in the BMR properties). Now the question is, if we know the polar field of a cycle, can it not predict more than one cycle? The answer to this question may be given by analysing the correlation between the polar field at the solar minimum and the amplitude of the subsequent cycles. Unfortunately, the observed polar field is available only for the last four cycles; thus, the multi-cycle correlation is not reliable solely based on the polar field.
Muñoz-Jaramillo
et al.
(
2013
)
analysed the facula count—a measure of the polar field—for Cycles 14–22 and found insignificant correlation of the polar field of cycle
n
n
with the amplitude of cycles
n
+
2
n+2
and
n
+
3
n+3
; also see
Nandy (
2021
)
. We perform an independent check utilising a composite data produced from the A(t) index of
Makarov
et al.
(
2001
)
and WSO polar field, and the results are shown in Figure
13
. It again shows that the polar field has no significant correlation beyond one cycle.
To understand the physics of why the correlation is limited to only one cycle, we recall the dynamo mechanism as illustrated in Figure
14
. We begin with a poloidal field of a cycle (
n
n
), the winding of which through the differential rotation generates a toroidal field. This process is deterministic and forms the basis for solar cycle prediction. However, the toroidal to sunspots for the next cycle (
n
+
1
n+1
) and their subsequent decay to the generation of poloidal field involve some randomness and nonlinearities, which we elaborate below.
Figure 14:
The basic dynamo chain. The poloidal field of cycle
n
n
, assumed to be negative (inward) in the north pole, generates a toroidal field of east-west direction in the northern hemisphere (through the
Ω
\rm\Omega
effect), which erupts as sunspots for the next cycle
n
+
1
n+1
. The sunspots decay to generate a poloidal field of opposite polarity (with respect to the existing polarity) through the so-called Babcock–Leighton process. The cycle then continues.
We note that as long as the meridional flow is assumed to be steady, the poloidal to toroidal conversion is deterministic, since the differential rotation shows only a tiny variation. However, the toroidal field to sunspots and their subsequent decay to the poloidal field involve some stochasticity and nonlinearity.
11.1
Fluctuations in the toroidal to poloidal field generation
While it is known that the toroidal field gives rise to active regions/BMRs, their individual properties cannot be predicted
(Fan,
2009
; Cheung and Isobe,
2014
)
. For example, the positions of active regions on the solar surface vary significantly, although they are clustered in a narrow band of mean latitude less than about
25
∘
25^{\circ}
(Cameron and Schüssler,
2016
; Biswas
et al.
,
2022
)
. If an active region appears at high latitude, the cross-equatorial cancellation of the leading polarity flux is less, and both polarity fluxes are transported towards the pole, resulting in a weak polar flux
(Petrovay
et al.
,
2020
)
. SFT simulations
(Jiang
et al.
,
2014
; Jiang,
2020
; Yeates
et al.
,
2023
)
and dynamo model
(Karak and Miesch,
2018
; Kumar
et al.
,
2024
)
have demonstrated that the generated polar flux and the axial dipole moment exponentially decrease following a Gaussian profile with an increase of the latitude of emergence of the active region. Next, the tilt of the active regions causes a considerable variation in the polar field
(Karak and Miesch,
2017
; Nagy
et al.
,
2017
)
. Observations show that a significant fraction of BMRs (about 10% and 30%, respectively) are of anti-Hale Joy (leading polarity is of opposite polarity and appears near the equator) and the Hale anti-Joy (the leading polarity near the pole and of correct polarity)
(Stenflo and Kosovichev,
2012
; McClintock
et al.
,
2014
; Sreedevi
et al.
,
2026
)
. These ‘wrongly tilted’ BMRs produce opposite polarity field (with respect to the dominant/expected field) in a cycle, thereby producing fluctuations in the polar field. Numerous studies using dynamo and SFT models have demonstrated the variation in the polar field due to this tilt anomaly and its implications in modelling the solar cycle irregularity
(Karak,
2023
)
. The analysis of the observed surface magnetic field and the active region tilts also reveals fluctuations in the polar field caused by the wrong orientations of the active regions
(Cameron
et al.
,
2013
; Mordvinov
et al.
,
2020
,
2022
)
. The next is the flux of the active region, which is also not a fixed quantity, and its value is given by a distribution as found in the observations. Finally, the varying properties of the time delay between the emergence of two subsequent active regions and the separation between two poles of an active region also cause disturbance in the generated polar field
(Kumar
et al.
,
2024
,
2026
; Sreedevi
et al.
,
2026
)
.
11.2
Nonlinearities in the toroidal to poloidal field generation
The next is the nonlinearity in the generation of the poloidal field. If a cycle is strong, its toroidal field in the deep CZ is high, and it generates a higher number of sunspots. Then, we vaguely expect the polar field generated at the end of this cycle to be high. Therefore, a strong cycle should follow another strong cycle, assuming that the effects of fluctuations in the polar field generation process is not too strong. However, this linear trend from one cycle to the next will not hold for a very strong cycle. Observations display that a strong cycle starts generating sunspots at higher latitudes with respect to an average cycle
(Solanki
et al.
,
2008
; Mandal
et al.
,
2017
)
. And, from theoretical modellings
(Jiang
et al.
,
2014
; Kumar
et al.
,
2024
)
, we know that high-latitude sunspots are less efficient in creating the polar field. Hence, if a cycle is strong, which generates a higher number of sunspots, we get a weaker polar field at the end of the cycle. Thus, the generated polar field at the end of a cycle should depend ‘nonlinearly’ on the cycle strength. This nonlinearity, named ‘latitude quenching’
(Petrovay,
2020
; Jiang,
2020
)
, is a potential candidate for regulating the polar field in the Sun
(Karak,
2020
; Talafha,
2025
)
.
Biswas
et al.
(
2022
); Karak
et al.
(
2026
)
showed that the latitudinal quenching is caused by the nonlinear flux loss from the interior due to magnetic buoyancy. A strong cycle releases flux at a faster rate in its early phase when the activity belt is already in high latitude.
Another potential candidate that can also introduce nonlinearity in the polar field is the tilt quenching. The thin flux tube model
(Spruit,
1981
; Longcope and Klapper,
1997
)
suggests that a strong toroidal flux tubes rise fast through the convection zone, allowing the Coriolis force to act on them for a lesser time
(D’Silva and Choudhuri,
1993
; Fan
et al.
,
1994
)
. Thus, an intense high-flux sunspot should have less tilt, which is generally known as the tilt quenching
(Lemerle and Charbonneau,
2017
; Karak and Miesch,
2017
)
. Due to measurement challenges in determining the tilt from observed magnetograms and a significant amount of scatter associated with the measured tilt angle, the tilt quenching is not well-constrained observationally
(Jha
et al.
,
2020
; Sreedevi
et al.
,
2024
; Qin
et al.
,
2025
)
. However, when we measure the cycle-average tilt, we clearly observe a negative trend with the cycle amplitude
(Dasi-Espuig
et al.
,
2010
,
2013
; Jiao
et al.
,
2021
)
.
In summary, similar to latitude quenching, the tilt quenching again tends to generate a weak cycle following a strong cycle, which was demonstrated in SFT simulations by
Jiang (
2020
)
and
Talafha
et al.
(
2022
)
and in observations by
Dey
et al.
(
2025
)
.
Other nonlinear processes may be involved in generating the poloidal field. These at least include nonlinear inflow around active regions
(a strong active region produces strong inflow around it, which inhibits the cross-equatorial cancellation of the leading polarity flux; Cameron and Schüssler,
2010
; Teweldebirhan
et al.
,
2024
; Talafha
et al.
,
2025
)
, meridional flow perturbation caused by Lorentz force
(Karak and Choudhuri,
2012
)
or inflow
(a strong cycle tends to produce a large reduction of flow; Jiang
et al.
,
2010
)
. All of these processes, by and large, reduce the polar field from the expected value when a cycle is sufficiently strong. This was demonstrated in observation as well through careful analysis of the sunspot and polar field data in
Dey
et al.
(
2025
)
.
Figure 15:
The scatter plots between the peak of the polar flux of a cycle
n
n
versus the amplitude of the toroidal flux (a proxy of sunspot cycle) of cycle (a)
n
n
(same cycle), (b)
n
+
1
n+1
(next cycle), (c)
n
+
2
n+2
, and (d)
n
+
3
n+3
for a dynamo simulations with stochastic
α
\alpha
and amplitude limiting nonlinearity. This model operates at twice the critical
α
\alpha
(weakly supercritical regime), which is supported by observations, as demonstrated by
Wavhal
et al.
(
2025
)
.
So, combining all these stochastic and nonlinear processes involved in the generation of the toroidal to polar field generation part of the dynamo loop (Figure
14
), we can confirm that it is this process where the dynamo chain is disturbed. Thus, the memory of the polar field of cycle
n
n
cannot be propagated fully to the polar field of cycle
n
+
1
n+1
, and the amplitude of sunspot cycle
n
+
2
n+2
cannot be predicted reliably. For a weak and moderate cycle, the nonlinearity is weak, and the polar field will not differ significantly from the expected one; nevertheless, stochastic fluctuations in the BMR properties can still break the memory of the polar field substantially. Dynamo simulations with weak stochastic fluctuations and nonlinearity show that the memory of the polar field is limited to one cycle when the dynamo operates in a supercritical regime, where the effects of nonlinearity and stochasticity are more pronounced. However, a memory is propagated beyond one cycle when the dynamo operates in a weakly supercritical regime (Figure
15
), which the observations and independent theoretical exploration favour
(Ghosh
et al.
,
2024
; Wavhal
et al.
,
2025
)
. However, this weak memory of the polar field that is propagated beyond one cycle is not useful for making a meaningful prediction of the solar cycle.
12
Conclusions and future outlook
An increasing number of predictions for solar cycle 25 clearly demonstrates that the community has realised the urgency of prediction and is trying hard to achieve a consensus. However, a significant deviation of the means of all predictions for both cycles 24 and 25 with respect to reality implies that we need to improve our predictive skills. This also poses a challenge to the solar cycle prediction panels, such as the NASA-NOAA Prediction Panel, on how to publish a consensus prediction
(Biesecker and Upton,
2019
; Miesch,
2025
)
. The extrapolation methods, including the nonlinear curve fitting, performed fairly well only after the cycle passes the solar minimum and spends a year in its ascending phase, which is then determined by the Waldmeier effect
(Kumar
et al.
,
2022
)
.
Figure 16:
Predictions of the peak sunspot number for solar Cycle 25 made using ML Models. The references are in Table
LABEL:tab:cyc25
. The
μ
\mu
and
σ
\sigma
respectively represent their mean and standard deviation. The dashed line marks the observed peak at 161.
In recent years, due to the development of various Machine Learning (ML) models and their increasing awareness in the solar physics community, a large number of predictions (36 out of 136 or 26.5%) for Cycle 24 were made employing Machine Learning (ML) models; Figure
16
. However, these predictions are also not up to the mark. The mean (
μ
\mu
) and standard deviation (
σ
\sigma
) of the predicted values are 133 and 36; recall that the observed value is 161. However, with respect to predictions using other methods, including those based on polar field, the ML prediction performs slightly better (recall
μ
\mu
= 132 and
σ
=
39
\sigma=39
for all predictions for Cycle 25). However, again, the ML prediction performs better only after the solar cycle has spent its initial few years.
Figure 17:
Predictions for Cycles 24 (top panel) and 25 (bottom) based on the polar field (or its proxy) at or around the solar minimum. Even the models that utilised a polar field or predicted/modelled the polar field (marked in blue) are included in this category because of their shared physical basis. The figure format is the same as Figure
16
.
The dynamo theory and various observations of the polar magnetic field and its proxy demonstrate that the polar field around the solar minimum acts as the seed for the solar cycle. Thus, it is not unexpected that the polar field (or its proxy) based predictions perform better than other methods. In Figure
17
top panel, this is indeed what we find. This overwhelming success encouraged scientists to make predictions from multiple independent groups based on the polar field or its proxy for the Cycle 25. Nearly 19% of predictions belong in this category. Even models that utilised the observed polar field or produced/modelled the polar field are considered in this category. As shown in the bottom panel of Figure
17
, the polar field-based predictions for Cycle 25, however, did not perform well. Almost all the predictions (except those made in the last few years) did not accurately predict the peak (the mean and standard deviation are 121.9 and 27.7, respectively).
One reason for this deviation could be the utilisation of the polar field before it has completely grown, leading to an inaccurate measure of the polar precursor. Studies demonstrate that polar field-based predictions may yield incorrect results when applied well before the solar minimum
(Jiang
et al.
,
2018b
; Kumar
et al.
,
2021b
)
. Another reason could be the real measurement problem of the polar field and its proxy (such as polar faculae). Existing measurements are highly compromised due to the projection effect; imaging the magnetic field from high latitudes will certainly help.
Dynamo models of Babcock–Leighton type can certainly benefit by employing good quality data from dedicated polar missions and a better data assimilation technique. There may be additional physics just beyond the polar field around the solar minimum that determines the amplitude of the next cycle. The same prediction method of
Choudhuri
et al.
(
2007
)
and
Jiang
et al.
(
2007
)
, developed for solar Cycle 24, performed poorly when applied to Cycle 25
(Guo
et al.
,
2021
)
, emphasising the need to improve the dynamo model by capturing additional physics, such as variation in meridional flow
(Hazra and Choudhuri,
2017
)
and the regime of operation of the solar dynamo
(Wavhal
et al.
,
2025
)
.
Past predictions, complemented by dynamo simulations, suggest that making a prediction a few years before the solar minimum is possible
(Bhowmik and Nandy,
2018
; Jiang
et al.
,
2018b
; Kumar
et al.
,
2021b
,
2022
; Biswas
et al.
,
2023a
)
; however, the appearance of anomalous active regions (such as anti-Hale and anti-Joy BMRs) increases the prediction uncertainty. Further, the synthesis of active regions into a model for the remaining period of the solar cycle introduces an additional layer of uncertainty, even after careful investigation of the solar cycle properties and the scaling relation of active region properties
(Nogueira
et al.
,
2026
)
. Thus, any early predictions utilising the polar field before the solar minimum need to be updated with time-to-time data of the polar field for greater reliability
(Upton and Hathaway,
2018b
)
. Both observations and the current understanding of dynamo theory suggest that making a reliable prediction before the previous cycle’s maximum is not possible
(Karak and Nandy,
2012
; Jiang
et al.
,
2018a
)
. We expect that solar cycle prediction will remain a hot topic, at least for a decade.
Acknowledgments
The author is indebted to Rambahadur Gupta, Anu Sreedevi, and Bidisha Dey for their assistance in preparing several figures and collecting/cross-checking the predicted values of solar cycles 24 and 25. Ram and Anu helped me considerably in extracting several references for solar cycle predictions. I am also grateful to Arnab Rai Choudhuri (my PhD supervisor), Jie Jiang, Piyali Chatterjee, and Dibyendu Nandi, from whom I have learned most of the fundamentals of the solar dynamo during my PhD, which enriched my understanding of the solar cycle and its prediction, as reflected in this review. Now I acknowledge financial support provided
the Indian Space Research Organisation (project no. ISRO/RES/RAC-S/IITBHU/2024-25) and the Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF) through the MATRIC program (file no. MTR/2023/000670)
and the computational resources of the PARAM Shivay Facility under the National Supercomputing Mission, the Government of India, at the Indian Institute of Technology Varanasi. SOHO is a project of international cooperation between ESA and NASA. Courtesy of NASA/SDO and the HMI science teams. The group sunspot number data are obtained from SIDC/SILSO (https://www.sidc.be/SILSO/DATA/GroupNumber/) and the sunspot number data are from World Data Center (WDC)-SILSO, Royal Observatory of Belgium, Brussels, International Sunspot Number V2.0
(Clette and Lefèvre,
2015
)
.
The “Flare Index” dataset was prepared by the Kandilli Observatory and Earthquake Research Institute at the Bogazici University and made available through the NOAA National Geophysical Data Center (NGDC; https://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/stp/space-weather/solar-data/solar-features/solar-flares/index/)
Table 1:
Summary of the predictions for Cycle 25.
Publications
Predicted
Method
sunspot
number
Du and Du (
2006
)
111.6
±
17.4
111.6\pm 17.4
Descending time of the previous cycle
Hamid and Galal (
2006
)
90.7
±
9.2
90.7\pm 9.2
Counts and durations of spotless events
Kane (
2007
)
119
±
7.5
119\pm 7.5
Extrapolation of spectral components
Abdusamatov (
2007
)
50
±
15
50\pm 15
Variations in solar radius or solar constant
Hiremath (
2008
)
110
±
11
110\pm 11
Physics-based (oscillator) model
Quassim
et al.
(
2007
)
116
Neuro-fuzzy approach
Pishkalo (
2008
)
112.3
±
33.4
112.3\pm 33.4
Neural-network-based sunspot prediction
Rigozo
et al.
(
2011
)
132.1
132.1
Extrapolation of spectral components
Helal and Galal (
2013
)
118.2
Statistical method of precursors
Yoshida (
2014
)
115.4
±
11.9
115.4\pm 11.9
Sunspot number before the minimum
Javaraiah (
2015
)
50
±
15
50\pm 15
Empirical correlations of cycle parameters
Li
et al.
(
2015
)
109.1
Multi-parameter empirical extrapolation
Bisoi
et al.
(
2015
)
56
±
12
56\pm 12
Declining of solar & interplanetary fields
Cameron
et al.
(
2016
)
Moderate
Physics based model (SFT)
Gkana and Zachilas (
2016
)
54.4
Time series analysis of sunspot number
Dani and Sulistiani (
2019
)
59.4
±
22.3
59.4\pm 22.3
Machine Learning Regression methods
Kitiashvili (
2016
)
90
±
15
90\pm 15
Data assimilation with Kalman filter
Hathaway and Upton (
2016
)
98.9
±
42
98.9\pm 42
Data driven SFT model
Singh and Bhargawa (
2017
)
102.8
±
24.6
102.8\pm 24.6
Using Hurst exponent
Chae and Kim (
2017
)
153
Autoregressive model
Iijima
et al.
(
2017
)
<
<
Cycle 24
Dipole moment from SFT model
Podladchikova
et al.
(
2017
)
<
<
Cycle 24
Sunspot number before minimum
Kakad
et al.
(
2017
)
63
Shannon Entropy-Based Prediction
Upton and Hathaway (
2018b
)
107
±
17
107\pm 17
Data-driven SFT simulations
Hawkes and Berger (
2018
)
117
Using Magnetic Helicity
Bhowmik and Nandy (
2018
)
107.63
±
17
107.63\pm 17
Data-driven SFT simulations
Okoh
et al.
(
2018
)
122.1
±
18.2
122.1\pm 18.2
Hybrid Regression-Neural Network
Jiang
et al.
(
2018b
)
124
±
31
124\pm 31
Data-driven SFT simulations
Attia
et al.
(
2013
)
90.7
±
8
90.7\pm 8
Regression and correlation-based
Petrovay
et al.
(
2018
)
129
Rush-to-the-poles in coronal emission
Pesnell and Schatten (
2018
)
135
±
25
135\pm 25
Polar field precursor
Gopalswamy
et al.
(
2018
)
148
±
14
148\pm 14
Proxy of polar field
Sarp
et al.
(
2018
)
154
±
12
154\pm 12
Nonlinear time-series modeling
Li
et al.
(
2018
)
168.5
±
16.3
168.5\pm 16.3
Solar cycle characteristics
Sabarinath and Anilkumar (
2018
)
85
±
10
85\pm 10
Multivariate regression & binary mixture
Hawkes and Berger (
2018
)
117.3
Magnetic Helicity as a Precursor
Okoh
et al.
(
2018
)
124
±
20.7
124\pm 20.7
Hybrid Regression-Neural Network
Macario-Rojas
et al.
(
2018
)
96.98
±
22.09
96.98\pm 22.09
Dynamo model with observed data
Kirov
et al.
(
2018
)
78
Geomagnetic activity as a precursor
Covas
et al.
(
2019
)
57
±
17
57\pm 17
Neural Network forecast
Labonville
et al.
(
2019
)
105
−
14
+
29
105^{+29}_{-14}
Dynamo with data assimilation
Dani and Sulistiani (
2019
)
159.4
±
22.3
159.4\pm 22.3
Machine Learning based model
Sello (
2019
)
107
±
10
107\pm 10
Non-linear dynamic techniques
Dani and Sulistiani (
2019
)
159.4
±
22.3
159.4\pm 22.3
Frequency-domain analysis of sunspot
Hazra and Choudhuri (
2019
)
139.34
±
16
139.34\pm 16
Polar field and decay rate of cycle
Han and Yin (
2019
)
228.8
±
40.5
228.8\pm 40.5
Neural-network using solar indices
Dani and Sulistiani (
2019
)
110.2
±
12.8
110.2\pm 12.8
ML-Regression methods
Singh and Bhargawa (
2019
)
89
±
9
89\pm 9
Hodrick Prescott filtering method
Pala and Atici (
2019
)
163.7
±
10
163.7\pm 10
Deep Learning Methods
Tan (
2019
)
<
<
Cycle 24
Statistical investigation of past cycles
Kakad
et al.
(
2020
)
136.9
±
24
136.9\pm 24
Analysis using kernel density estimator
Biesecker and Upton (
2019
)
<
<
average
Survey of forecasts by Panel
McIntosh
et al.
(
2020
)
>
>
Cycle 23
Extended solar cycle model
Svalgaard (
2020
)
128
±
10
128\pm 10
Polar field at minimum
Lee (
2020
)
101.44
Hybrid Deep Learning Model
Benson
et al.
(
2020
)
107.2
±
19.75
107.2\pm 19.75
Deep Neural Networks
Gonçalves
et al.
(
2020
)
117
Warped Gaussian process regression
Miao
et al.
(
2020
)
121.5
±
32.9
121.5\pm 32.9
Precursor Method (aa-index)
Bisoi
et al.
(
2020
)
134
±
11
134\pm 11
Polar and heliospheric field at 1 AU
Bisoi and Janardhan (
2020
)
155
±
11
155\pm 11
Flux cancelled at equator & polar field
Du (
2020c
)
137.8
±
31.3
137.8\pm 31.3
Comparing the past similar cycles
Du (
2020b
)
130
±
31.9
130\pm 31.9
Sunspot number before solar minimum
Du (
2020a
)
151.1
±
16.9
151.1\pm 16.9
Waldmeier effect
Kumar
et al.
(
2021b
)
120
±
25
120\pm 25
Polar field rise rate
Guo
et al.
(
2021
)
126
Dynamo model with polar field
Coban
et al.
(
2021
)
59.4
Deep learning technique
Javaraiah (
2021
)
76
±
12
76\pm 12
Properties of solar cycle
Velasco Herrera
et al.
(
2021
)
95
±
15
95\pm 15
Machine Learning algorithms
Courtillot
et al.
(
2021
)
97.6
±
7.8
97.6\pm 7.8
Astronomical ephemeris
Chowdhury
et al.
(
2021
)
100.21
±
15.06
100.21\pm 15.06
Geomagnetic activity Ap-index
Burud
et al.
(
2021
)
104.23
±
17.35
104.23\pm 17.35
Spotless days and geomagnetic index
Wu and Qin (
2021
)
114.5
±
16
114.5\pm 16
Two-parameter modified logistic
Singh
et al.
(
2021
)
119.42
±
23.51
119.42\pm 23.51
Geomagnetic activity indices
Janssens (
2021
)
118
±
29
118\pm 29
Polar faculae
Xiong
et al.
(
2021
)
140.2
Several precursors
Yan
et al.
(
2021
)
120
±
27
120\pm 27
Two-stage Statistical Model
Pishkalo (
2021
)
121
±
4
121\pm 4
Polar field near minimum
Wang
et al.
(
2021
)
114.3
long short-term memory deep learning
Penza
et al.
(
2021
)
130
±
10
130\pm 10
Relation of sunspot areas and plages
Li
et al.
(
2021
)
175.62
Deep learning based on sunspot area
Kakad and Kakad (
2021
)
103.3
±
15
103.3\pm 15
Even-odd pair of solar cycle
Kumar
et al.
(
2022
)
137
±
23
137\pm 23
Rise rate of polar field
Ahluwalia (
2022
)
126.7
±
4.7
126.7\pm 4.7
Sunspot numbers & geomagnetic indices
Bizzarri
et al.
(
2022
)
110
±
9
110\pm 9
Multistep Bayesian Neural network
Brajša
et al.
(
2022
)
121
±
33
121\pm 33
Activity level 3 yr before minimum
Du (
2022a
)
124
±
30
124\pm 30
Fitting the solar cycle
Javaraiah (
2022
)
130
±
12
130\pm 12
Long-Term Variations in Solar Activity
Dang
et al.
(
2022
)
133.47
133.47
Various ML models
Du (
2022b
)
135.5
±
33.2
135.5\pm 33.2
Rise rate
Zhu
et al.
(
2022
)
147.9
147.9
Optimized Long Short-Term Memory
Prasad
et al.
(
2022
)
171.9
±
3.4
171.9\pm 3.4
Long short-term memory forecasting
Efimenko and Lozitsky (
2022
)
184
±
15
184\pm 15
Rate of increase of solar activity
Lu
et al.
(
2022
)
145.3
Bimodal forecasting model
Nagovitsyn and Ivanov (
2022
)
147
Gnevyshev-Ohl rule
Ivanov (
2022
)
181
±
46
181\pm 46
Cycle length vs amplitude relation
Chowdhury
et al.
(
2022
)
160.29
±
66.06
160.29\pm 66.06
Non-linear empirical dynamical modelling
Podladchikova
et al.
(
2022
)
110
±
26
110\pm 26
Growth rate of the cycle
Arregui (
2022
)
190.6
±
10
190.6\pm 10
Bayesian inference
Koutchmy
et al.
(
2022
)
226.6
Polar regions activity
Espuña Fontcuberta
et al.
(
2023
)
134
±
8
134\pm 8
Neural–network based ML technique
Obridko
et al.
(
2023
)
125.2
±
5.6
125.2\pm 5.6
Extended solar cycle model
Javaraiah (
2023
)
125
±
11
125\pm 11
Variations of sunspot area and number
Upton and Hathaway (
2023
)
134
±
8
134\pm 8
Curve-fitting and precursors
Prasad
et al.
(
2023
)
136.9
Deep Learning Based Neural Network
Nagovitsyn and Ivanov (
2023
)
149
±
28
149\pm 28
Sunspot number 7 yr before minimum
Becheker
et al.
(
2023
)
164
±
10
164\pm 10
Curve fitting
Zhu
et al.
(
2023
)
214.4
±
22
214.4\pm 22
Long short-term memory model
Liu
et al.
(
2023
)
135.2
135.2
Long short-term memory model
Raju
et al.
(
2023
)
206
±
7.6
206\pm 7.6
Supergranular lane and sunspot number
Aparicio
et al.
(
2023
)
131
±
32
131\pm 32
Ascending inflection point
Pishkalo and Vasiljeva (
2023
)
136
±
36
136\pm 36
Cycle precursor
Efimenko and Lozitsky (
2023
)
185
±
18
185\pm 18
Sunspot number increase rate
Kalkan
et al.
(
2023
)
116.6
Neural networks model
Arregui (
2023
)
184
±
25
184\pm 25
Bayesian Interface
Riley (
2023
)
130
Superposed-epoch analysis
Su
et al.
(
2023
)
133.9
±
7.2
133.9\pm 7.2
Deep learning model
Lozitsky and Efimenko (
2023
)
183
±
23
183\pm 23
Rise rate of sunspot number
Su
et al.
(
2024a
)
127.94
±
6.37
127.94\pm 6.37
Deep learning models
Flandez and Munoz (
2024
)
179
Visibility Graph and Hathaway function
Sharma
et al.
(
2024
)
112
±
18
112\pm 18
Geomagnetic precursor
Rodríguez
et al.
(
2024a
)
134.2
±
9.8
134.2\pm 9.8
Multivariate ML
He and Zhu (
2024
)
160
ML model
Kumar (
2024
)
127.16
±
6.83
127.16\pm 6.83
Deep learning model
Petrovay (
2024
)
155.8
±
20.7
155.8\pm 20.7
Parametric time series model
Kumar and Kumar (
2023
)
140.84
ML model
Rodríguez
et al.
(
2024b
)
67.75
±
6.45
67.75\pm 6.45
Spectral Analysis & ML model
Cao
et al.
(
2024
)
141.55
±
36.95
141.55\pm 36.95
ML model
Pal and Nandy (
2024
)
128
±
20
128\pm 20
Algebraic quantification of dipole moment
Luo and Tan (
2024
)
146.7
±
33.40
146.7\pm 33.40
Wavelet transform and fitting function
Xu
et al.
(
2024
)
193
±
39
193\pm 39
Physics informed ML
Pesnell (
2024
)
130.7
±
0.5
130.7\pm 0.5
Slope of rising phase
Jaswal
et al.
(
2024
)
116.91
±
2.89
116.91\pm 2.89
Dipole moment decay rate
Wang (
2024
)
146
±
21
146\pm 21
Interplanetary field strength
Kleeorin
et al.
(
2024
)
150
Dynamo model & neural network
Su
et al.
(
2024b
)
127.94
±
6.37
127.94\pm 6.37
Deep learning model
Conflict of interest
The author states that there is no conflict of interest.
References
K.I. Abdusamatov (2007)
Optimal prediction of the peak of the next 11-year activity cycle and of the peaks of several succeeding cycles on the basis of long-term variations in the solar radius or solar constant.
.
Kinemat. Phys. Celest. Bodies
23
,
pp. 97–100
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
H. S. Ahluwalia (2022)
Forecast for sunspot cycle 25 activity
.
Advances in Space Research
69
(
1
),
pp. 794–797
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
H. M. Antia, S. Basu, and S. M. Chitre (2008)
Solar Rotation Rate and Its Gradients During Cycle 23
.
\apj
681
,
pp. 680–692
.
External Links:
0803.3619
,
Document
Cited by:
§9
.
A. J. P. Aparicio, V. M. S. Carrasco, and J. M. Vaquero (2023)
Prediction of the Maximum Amplitude of Solar Cycle 25 Using the Ascending Inflection Point
.
\solphys
298
(
8
),
pp. 100
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
I. Arregui (2023)
A probability distribution for the amplitude of Solar Cycle 25
.
In
Highlights on Spanish Astrophysics XI
,
M. Manteiga, L. Bellot, P. Benavidez, A. de Lorenzo-Cáceres, M. A. Fuente, M. J. Martínez, M. Vázquez Acosta, and C. Dafonte (Eds.)
,
pp. 300
.
Cited by:
Table 1
.
I. Arregui (2022)
Methodology for Predicting the Probability Distribution of the Amplitude of Solar Cycle 25
.
\solphys
297
(
2
),
pp. 21
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
A. Attia, H. A. Ismail, and H. M. Basurah (2013)
A Neuro-Fuzzy modeling for prediction of solar cycles 24 and 25
.
\apss
344
(
1
),
pp. 5–11
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
H. W. Babcock (1961)
The Topology of the Sun’s Magnetic Field and the 22-YEAR Cycle.
.
\apj
133
,
pp. 572
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
,
§3
.
H. D. Babcock (1959)
The Sun’s Polar Magnetic Field.
.
\apj
130
,
pp. 364
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
Y. Baruah (2025)
Geomagnetic Storms and Satellite Orbital Decay
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2506.03305
.
External Links:
Document
,
2506.03305
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Basu and H. M. Antia (2010)
Characteristics of Solar Meridional Flows during Solar Cycle 23
.
\apj
717
(
1
),
pp. 488–495
.
External Links:
Document
,
1005.3031
Cited by:
§9
.
I. Baumann, D. Schmitt, M. Schüssler, and S. K. Solanki (2004)
Evolution of the large-scale magnetic field on the solar surface: A parameter study
.
\aap
426
,
pp. 1075–1091
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
K. Becheker, Z. Belhadi, A. Zaidi, and M. R. Bekli (2023)
A Novel Approach for Forecasting Cycle 25
.
\solphys
298
(
5
),
pp. 65
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
B. Benson, W. D. Pan, A. Prasad, G. A. Gary, and Q. Hu (2020)
Forecasting Solar Cycle 25 Using Deep Neural Networks
.
\solphys
295
(
5
),
pp. 65
.
External Links:
Document
,
2005.12406
Cited by:
Table 1
.
P. Bhowmik, J. Jiang, L. Upton, A. Lemerle, and D. Nandy (2023)
Physical Models for Solar Cycle Predictions
.
\ssr
219
(
5
),
pp. 40
.
External Links:
Document
,
2303.12648
Cited by:
§1
.
P. Bhowmik and D. Nandy (2018)
Prediction of the strength and timing of sunspot cycle 25 reveal decadal-scale space environmental conditions
.
Nature Communications
9
,
pp. 5209
.
External Links:
Document
,
1909.04537
Cited by:
Table 1
,
§10.2
,
§10.2
,
§12
,
§5
.
D. A. Biesecker and L. Upton (2019)
Solar Cycle 25 Consensus Prediction Update
.
In
AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts
,
AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts
, Vol.
2019
,
pp. SH13B–03
.
Cited by:
Table 1
,
§12
.
S. K. Bisoi, P. Janardhan, and S. Ananthakrishnan (2020)
Another Mini Solar Maximum in the Offing: A Prediction for the Amplitude of Solar Cycle 25
.
Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics)
125
(
7
),
pp. e27508
.
External Links:
Document
,
1910.03841
Cited by:
Table 1
.
S. K. Bisoi, P. Janardhan, S. Ananthakrishnan, M. Tokumaru, and K. Fujiki (2015)
Solar and interplanetary signatures of declining of solar magnetic fields: Implications to the next solar cycle 25
.
In
IAU General Assembly
,
Vol.
29
,
pp. 2256637
.
Cited by:
Table 1
.
S. K. Bisoi and P. Janardhan (2020)
A New Tool for Predicting the Solar Cycle: Correlation Between Flux Transport at the Equator and the Poles
.
\solphys
295
(
6
),
pp. 79
.
External Links:
Document
,
1911.03865
Cited by:
Table 1
.
A. Biswas, B. B. Karak, and R. Cameron (2022)
Toroidal Flux Loss due to Flux Emergence Explains why Solar Cycles Rise Differently but Decay in a Similar Way
.
\prl
129
(
24
),
pp. 241102
.
External Links:
Document
,
2210.07061
Cited by:
§11.1
,
§11.2
,
§9
.
A. Biswas, B. B. Karak, and P. Kumar (2023a)
Exploring the reliability of polar field rise rate as a precursor for an early prediction of solar cycle
.
\mnras
526
(
3
),
pp. 3994–4003
.
External Links:
Document
,
2308.01155
Cited by:
§10.1
,
§12
,
§5
.
A. Biswas, B. B. Karak, I. Usoskin, and E. Weisshaar (2023b)
Long-Term Modulation of Solar Cycles
.
\ssr
219
(
3
),
pp. 19
.
External Links:
Document
,
2302.14845
Cited by:
§1
.
I. Bizzarri, D. Barghini, S. Mancuso, S. Alessio, S. Rubinetti, and C. Taricco (2022)
Forecasting the solar cycle 25 using a multistep Bayesian neural network
.
\mnras
515
(
4
),
pp. 5062–5070
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
R. Brajša, G. Verbanac, M. Bandić, A. Hanslmeier, I. Skokić, and D. Sudar (2022)
A prediction for the 25th solar cycle maximum amplitude
.
Astronomische Nachrichten
343
(
3
),
pp. e13960
.
External Links:
Document
,
2203.11293
Cited by:
Table 1
.
D. S. Burud, R. Jain, A. K. Awasthi, S. Chaudhari, S. C. Tripathy, N. Gopalswamy, P. Chamadia, S. C. Kaushik, and R. Vhatkar (2021)
Spotless days and geomagnetic index as the predictors of solar cycle 25
.
Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics
21
(
9
),
pp. 215
.
External Links:
Document
,
2105.11448
Cited by:
Table 1
.
P. Caligari, F. Moreno-Insertis, and M. Schussler (1995)
Emerging Flux Tubes in the Solar Convection Zone. I. Asymmetry, Tilt, and Emergence Latitude
.
The Astrophysical Journal
441
,
pp. 886
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
R. H. Cameron, M. Dasi-Espuig, J. Jiang, E. Işık, D. Schmitt, and M. Schüssler (2013)
Limits to solar cycle predictability: Cross-equatorial flux plumes
.
\aap
557
,
pp. A141
.
External Links:
1308.2827
,
Document
Cited by:
§11.1
,
§3
.
R. H. Cameron, J. Jiang, and M. Schüssler (2016)
Solar Cycle 25: Another Moderate Cycle?
.
\apjl
823
(
2
),
pp. L22
.
External Links:
Document
,
1604.05405
Cited by:
Table 1
.
R. H. Cameron and M. Schüssler (2010)
Changes of the Solar Meridional Velocity Profile During Cycle 23 Explained by Flows Toward the Activity Belts
.
\apj
720
,
pp. 1030–1032
.
External Links:
1007.2548
,
Document
Cited by:
§11.2
.
R. H. Cameron and M. Schüssler (2016)
The turbulent diffusion of toroidal magnetic flux as inferred from properties of the sunspot butterfly diagram
.
\aap
591
,
pp. A46
.
External Links:
1604.07340
,
Document
Cited by:
§10.2
,
§11.1
.
R. Cameron and M. Schüssler (2008)
A Robust Correlation between Growth Rate and Amplitude of Solar Cycles: Consequences for Prediction Methods
.
\apj
685
,
pp. 1291–1296
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§10.1
.
R. Cameron and M. Schüssler (2015)
The crucial role of surface magnetic fields for the solar dynamo
.
Science
347
,
pp. 1333–1335
.
External Links:
1503.08469
,
Document
Cited by:
Figure 8
,
§3
.
R. H. Cameron and M. Schüssler (2023)
Observationally Guided Models for the Solar Dynamo and the Role of the Surface Field
.
\ssr
219
(
7
),
pp. 60
.
External Links:
Document
,
2305.02253
Cited by:
Figure 7
,
§3
.
J. Cao, T. Xu, L. Deng, X. Zhou, S. Li, Y. Liu, W. Wang, and W. Zhou (2024)
An Improved Prediction of Solar Cycles 25 and 26 Using the Informer Model: Gnevyshev Peaks and North–South Asymmetry
.
\apj
969
(
2
),
pp. 120
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
J. Chae and Y. H. Kim (2017)
Performance of the Autoregressive Method in Long-Term Prediction of Sunspot Number
.
Journal of Korean Astronomical Society
50
(
2
),
pp. 21–27
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
S. C. Chapman, R. B. Horne, and N. W. Watkins (2020)
Using the aa Index Over the Last 14 Solar Cycles to Characterize Extreme Geomagnetic Activity
.
\grl
47
(
3
),
pp. e86524
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
P. Charbonneau and G. Barlet (2011)
The dynamo basis of solar cycle precursor schemes
.
Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics
73
(
2-3
),
pp. 198–206
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§6
.
P. Charbonneau and D. Sokoloff (2023)
Evolution of Solar and Stellar Dynamo Theory
.
\ssr
219
(
5
),
pp. 35
.
External Links:
Document
,
2305.16553
Cited by:
§3
.
P. Charbonneau (2020)
Dynamo models of the solar cycle
.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics
17
(
1
),
pp. 4
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§4.1
,
§4.2
.
P. Chatterjee, D. Nandy, and A. R. Choudhuri (2004)
Full-sphere simulations of a circulation-dominated solar dynamo: Exploring the parity issue
.
\aap
427
,
pp. 1019–1030
.
External Links:
astro-ph/0405027
,
Document
Cited by:
§4.2
.
S. Chatterjee and G. Hazra (2026)
Probing the Large-scale Magnetic Field inside the Sun from Three Decades of Observed Surface Magnetograms
.
\apjl
997
(
1
),
pp. L27
.
External Links:
Document
,
2509.23959
Cited by:
§5
,
§9
.
P. F. Chen (2011)
Coronal Mass Ejections: Models and Their Observational Basis
.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics
8
(
1
),
pp. 1
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
M. C. M. Cheung and H. Isobe (2014)
Flux Emergence (Theory)
.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics
11
(
1
),
pp. 3
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§11.1
.
A. R. Choudhuri, P. Chatterjee, and J. Jiang (2007)
Predicting Solar Cycle 24 With a Solar Dynamo Model
.
Physical Review Letters
98
(
13
),
pp. 131103
.
External Links:
astro-ph/0701527
,
Document
Cited by:
§12
,
§3
,
§8
,
§9
.
A. R. Choudhuri, M. Schüssler, and M. Dikpati (1995)
The solar dynamo with meridional circulation.
.
\aap
303
,
pp. L29
.
Cited by:
§4.2
.
A. R. Choudhuri (2021)
The meridional circulation of the Sun: Observations, theory and connections with the solar dynamo
.
Science China Physics, Mechanics, and Astronomy
64
(
3
),
pp. 239601
.
External Links:
Document
,
2008.09347
Cited by:
§4.1
,
§4
.
P. Chowdhury, R. Jain, P. C. Ray, D. Burud, and A. Chakrabarti (2021)
Prediction of Amplitude and Timing of Solar Cycle 25
.
\solphys
296
(
4
),
pp. 69
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
P. Chowdhury, V. Sarp, A. Kilcik, P. C. Ray, J. Rozelot, and V. N. Obridko (2022)
A non-linear approach to predicting the amplitude and timing of the sunspot area in cycle 25
.
\mnras
513
(
3
),
pp. 4152–4158
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
F. Clette and L. Lefèvre (2015)
SILSO sunspot number v2.0
.
Note:
https://doi.org/10.24414/qnza-ac80Published by WDC SILSO - Royal Observatory of Belgium (ROB)
Cited by:
§12
.
F. Clette, L. Svalgaard, J. M. Vaquero, and E. W. Cliver (2014)
Revisiting the Sunspot Number. A 400-Year Perspective on the Solar Cycle
.
Vol.
186
,
pp. 35–103
.
External Links:
Document
,
1407.3231
Cited by:
Figure 5
.
E. W. Cliver and W. F. Dietrich (2013)
The 1859 space weather event revisited: limits of extreme activity
.
Journal of Space Weather and Space Climate
3
,
pp. A31
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
E. W. Cliver, C. J. Schrijver, K. Shibata, and I. G. Usoskin (2022)
Extreme solar events
.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics
19
(
1
),
pp. 2
.
External Links:
Document
,
2205.09265
Cited by:
§1
.
G. C. Coban, A. Raheem, H. Cavus, and M. Asghari-Targhi (2021)
Can Solar Cycle 25 Be a New Dalton Minimum?
.
\solphys
296
(
11
),
pp. 156
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
V. Courtillot, F. Lopes, and J. L. Le Mouël (2021)
On the Prediction of Solar Cycles
.
\solphys
296
(
1
),
pp. 21
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
E. Covas, N. Peixinho, and J. Fernandes (2019)
Neural Network Forecast of the Sunspot Butterfly Diagram
.
\solphys
294
(
3
),
pp. 24
.
External Links:
Document
,
1801.04435
Cited by:
Table 1
.
S. D’Silva and A. R. Choudhuri (1993)
A theoretical model for tilts of bipolar magnetic regions
.
\aap
272
,
pp. 621
.
Cited by:
§11.2
,
§3
.
Y. Dang, Z. Chen, H. Li, and H. Shu (2022)
A comparative study of non-deep learning, deep learning, and ensemble learning methods for sunspot number prediction
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2203.05757
.
External Links:
Document
,
2203.05757
Cited by:
Table 1
.
T. Dani and S. Sulistiani (2019)
Prediction of maximum amplitude of solar cycle 25 using machine learning
.
In
Journal of Physics Conference Series
,
Journal of Physics Conference Series
, Vol.
1231
,
pp. 012022
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
,
Table 1
,
Table 1
,
Table 1
.
M. Dasi-Espuig, S. K. Solanki, N. A. Krivova, R. Cameron, and T. Peñuela (2010)
Sunspot group tilt angles and the strength of the solar cycle
.
\aap
518
,
pp. A7
.
External Links:
1005.1774
,
Document
Cited by:
§11.2
,
§3
.
M. Dasi-Espuig, S. K. Solanki, N. A. Krivova, R. Cameron, and T. Peñuela (2013)
Sunspot group tilt angles and the strength of the solar cycle (Corrigendum)
.
\aap
556
,
pp. 1
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§11.2
.
B. Dey, A. Sreedevi, and B. B. Karak (2025)
Role of Sunspot Latitude versus Tilt in Determining the Polar Field and Amplitude of the Next Cycle: Cause of the Weak Solar Cycle 20
.
\apj
993
(
2
),
pp. 196
.
External Links:
Document
,
2509.17146
Cited by:
§11.2
,
§11.2
,
§3
.
M. Dikpati and P. Charbonneau (1999)
A Babcock-Leighton Flux Transport Dynamo with Solar-like Differential Rotation
.
\apj
518
,
pp. 508–520
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§4.2
.
Z. L. Du (2020a)
The solar cycle: predicting the peak of solar cycle 25
.
\apss
365
(
6
),
pp. 104
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
Z. L. Du (2022a)
The solar cycle: a modified Gaussian function for fitting the shape of the solar cycle and predicting cycle 25
.
\apss
367
(
2
),
pp. 20
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
Z. Du and S. Du (2006)
The Relationship Between the Amplitude and Descending Time of a Solar Activity Cycle
.
\solphys
238
(
2
),
pp. 431–437
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
Z. Du (2020b)
Predicting the Amplitude of Solar Cycle 25 Using the Value 39 Months Before the Solar Minimum
.
\solphys
295
(
10
),
pp. 147
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
Z. Du (2020c)
Predicting the Shape of Solar Cycle 25 Using a Similar-Cycle Method
.
\solphys
295
(
10
),
pp. 134
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
Z. Du (2022b)
Predicting the Maximum Amplitude of Solar Cycle 25 Using the Early Value of the Rising Phase
.
\solphys
297
(
5
),
pp. 61
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
V. M. Efimenko and V. G. Lozitsky (2022)
Prediction of the Amplitude of 25
TH
Solar Cycle Using the Rate of Increase of Solar Activity
.
Odessa Astronomical Publications
35
,
pp. 92
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
V. M. Efimenko and V. G. Lozitsky (2023)
Solar cycle 25 amplitude prediction based on sunspot number increase rate
.
Advances in Space Research
72
(
4
),
pp. 1448–1453
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
A. Espuña Fontcuberta, A. Ghosh, S. Chatterjee, D. Mitra, and D. Nandy (2023)
Forecasting Solar Cycle 25 with Physical Model-Validated Recurrent Neural Networks
.
\solphys
298
(
1
),
pp. 8
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
Y. Fan, G. H. Fisher, and E. E. Deluca (1993)
The Origin of Morphological Asymmetries in Bipolar Active Regions
.
The Astrophysical Journal
405
,
pp. 390
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
Y. Fan, G. H. Fisher, and A. N. McClymont (1994)
Dynamics of emerging active region flux loops
.
\apj
436
,
pp. 907–928
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§11.2
.
Y. Fan (2009)
Magnetic Fields in the Solar Convection Zone
.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics
6
,
pp. 4
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§11.1
.
Y. Fan (2021)
Magnetic Fields in the Solar Convection Zone
.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics
6
,
pp. 4
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
N. A. Featherstone and M. S. Miesch (2015)
Meridional Circulation in Solar and Stellar Convection Zones
.
\apj
804
,
pp. 67
.
External Links:
1501.06501
,
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
E. Flandez and V. Munoz (2024)
A prediction for 25th solar cycle using visibility graph and Hathaway function
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2412.12924
.
External Links:
Document
,
2412.12924
Cited by:
Table 1
.
M. K. Georgoulis, S. L. Yardley, J. A. Guerra, S. A. Murray, A. Ahmadzadeh, A. Anastasiadis, R. Angryk, B. Aydin, D. Banerjee, G. Barnes, A. Bemporad, F. Benvenuto, D. S. Bloomfield, M. Bobra, C. Campi, E. Camporeale, C. E. DeForest, A. G. Emslie, D. Falconer, L. Feng, W. Gan, L. M. Green, S. Guastavino, M. Hapgood, D. Kempton, I. Kitiashvili, I. Kontogiannis, M. B. Korsos, K.D. Leka, P. Massa, A. M. Massone, D. Nandy, A. Nindos, A. Papaioannou, S. Park, S. Patsourakos, M. Piana, N. E. Rawafi, V. M. Sadykov, S. Toriumi, A. Vourlidas, H. Wang, J. T. L. Wang, K. Whitman, Y. Yan, and A. N. Zhukov (2024)
Prediction of solar energetic events impacting space weather conditions
.
Advances in Space Research
.
External Links:
ISSN 0273-1177
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
§1
.
A. Ghosh, P. Kumar, A. Prasad, and B. B. Karak (2024)
Characterizing the Solar Cycle Variability Using Nonlinear Time Series Analysis at Different Amounts of Dynamo Supercriticality: Solar Dynamo is Not Highly Supercritical
.
\aj
167
(
5
),
pp. 209
.
External Links:
Document
,
2403.06176
Cited by:
§11.2
,
§4.1
.
P. A. Gilman and R. Howard (1984)
Variations in solar rotation with the sunspot cycle
.
\apj
283
,
pp. 385–391
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
L. Gizon, R. H. Cameron, M. Pourabdian, Z. Liang, D. Fournier, A. C. Birch, and C. S. Hanson (2020)
Meridional flow in the Sun’s convection zone is a single cell in each hemisphere
.
Science
368
(
6498
),
pp. 1469–1472
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
L. Gizon and M. Rempel (2008)
Observation and Modeling of the Solar-Cycle Variation of the Meridional Flow
.
\solphys
251
(
1-2
),
pp. 241–250
.
External Links:
Document
,
0803.0950
Cited by:
§9
.
A. Gkana and L. Zachilas (2016)
Re-evaluation of Predictive Models in Light of New Data: Sunspot Number Version 2.0
.
\solphys
291
(
8
),
pp. 2457–2472
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
E. M. Golubeva, A. Biswas, A. I. Khlystova, P. Kumar, and B. B. Karak (2023)
Probing the variations in the timing of the Sun’s polar magnetic field reversals through observations and surface flux transport simulations
.
\mnras
525
(
2
),
pp. 1758–1768
.
External Links:
Document
,
2307.13452
Cited by:
§10.1
.
Í. G. Gonçalves, E. Echer, and E. Frigo (2020)
Sunspot cycle prediction using Warped Gaussian process regression
.
Advances in Space Research
65
(
1
),
pp. 677–683
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
I. González Hernández, R. Howe, R. Komm, and F. Hill (2010)
Meridional Circulation During the Extended Solar Minimum: Another Component of the Torsional Oscillation?
.
\apjl
713
(
1
),
pp. L16–L20
.
External Links:
Document
,
1003.1685
Cited by:
§9
.
I. González Hernández, R. Komm, F. Hill, R. Howe, T. Corbard, and D. A. Haber (2006)
Meridional Circulation Variability from Large-Aperture Ring-Diagram Analysis of Global Oscillation Network Group and Michelson Doppler Imager Data
.
\apj
638
(
1
),
pp. 576–583
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§9
.
N. Gopalswamy, P. Mäkelä, S. Yashiro, and S. Akiyama (2018)
Long-term solar activity studies using microwave imaging observations and prediction for cycle 25
.
Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics
176
,
pp. 26–33
.
External Links:
Document
,
1804.02544
Cited by:
Table 1
.
G. Guerrero, M. Dikpati, and E. M. de Gouveia Dal Pino (2009)
The Role of Diffusivity Quenching in Flux-transport Dynamo Models
.
\apj
701
,
pp. 725–736
.
External Links:
0906.3685
,
Document
Cited by:
§4.2
.
W. Guo, J. Jiang, and J. Wang (2021)
A Dynamo-Based Prediction of Solar Cycle 25
.
\solphys
296
(
9
),
pp. 136
.
External Links:
Document
,
2108.01412
Cited by:
Table 1
,
§12
,
§8
.
R. Hajra, A. Marques de Souza Franco, E. Echer, and M. José Alves Bolzan (2021)
Long Term Variations of the Geomagnetic Activity: A Comparison Between the Strong and Weak Solar Activity Cycles and Implications for the Space Climate
.
Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics)
126
(
4
),
pp. e28695
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
G. E. Hale, F. Ellerman, S. B. Nicholson, and A. H. Joy (1919)
The Magnetic Polarity of Sun-Spots
.
\apj
49
,
pp. 153
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
,
§3
.
G. E. Hale and S. B. Nicholson (1925)
The Law of Sun-Spot Polarity
.
\apj
62
,
pp. 270
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
R. H. Hamid and A. A. Galal (2006)
Preliminary Prediction of the Strength of the 24th 11-Year Solar Cycle
.
In
Solar Activity and its Magnetic Origin
,
V. Bothmer and A. A. Hady (Eds.)
,
IAU Symposium
, Vol.
233
,
pp. 413–416
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
Y. B. Han and Z. Q. Yin (2019)
A Decline Phase Modeling for the Prediction of Solar Cycle 25
.
\solphys
294
(
8
),
pp. 107
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
S. M. Hanasoge (2022)
Surface and interior meridional circulation in the Sun
.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics
19
(
1
),
pp. 3
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
D. H. Hathaway and L. Rightmire (2010)
Variations in the Sun’s Meridional Flow over a Solar Cycle
.
Science
327
(
5971
),
pp. 1350
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§9
.
D. H. Hathaway and L. A. Upton (2016)
Predicting the amplitude and hemispheric asymmetry of solar cycle 25 with surface flux transport
.
Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics)
121
(
11
),
pp. 10,744–10,753
.
External Links:
Document
,
1611.05106
Cited by:
Table 1
.
D. H. Hathaway (2015)
The Solar Cycle
.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics
12
(
1
),
pp. 4
.
External Links:
Document
,
1502.07020
Cited by:
§1
,
§10.2
.
G. Hawkes and M. A. Berger (2018)
Magnetic Helicity as a Predictor of the Solar Cycle
.
\solphys
293
(
7
),
pp. 109
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
,
Table 1
.
H. Hayakawa (2025)
The long-term solar variability, as reconstructed from historical sources: Several case studies in the 17th – 18th centuries
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2502.14665
.
External Links:
Document
,
2502.14665
Cited by:
§1
.
G. Hazra, A. R. Choudhuri, and M. S. Miesch (2017)
A Theoretical Study of the Build-up of the Sun Polar Magnetic Field by using a 3D Kinematic Dynamo Model
.
\apj
835
,
pp. 39
.
External Links:
1610.02726
,
Document
Cited by:
§5
.
G. Hazra, B. B. Karak, D. Banerjee, and A. R. Choudhuri (2015)
Correlation Between Decay Rate and Amplitude of Solar Cycles as Revealed from Observations and Dynamo Theory
.
\solphys
290
,
pp. 1851–1870
.
External Links:
1410.8641
,
Document
Cited by:
§8
.
G. Hazra, B. B. Karak, and A. R. Choudhuri (2014)
Is a Deep One-cell Meridional Circulation Essential for the Flux Transport Solar Dynamo?
.
\apj
782
,
pp. 93
.
External Links:
1309.2838
,
Document
Cited by:
§4.2
.
G. Hazra and M. Miesch (2014)
STABLE with surface convection!
.
\apj
782
,
pp. 93
.
External Links:
1309.2838
,
Document
Cited by:
§4.2
.
G. Hazra and A. R. Choudhuri (2017)
A theoretical model of the variation of the meridional circulation with the solar cycle
.
\mnras
472
(
3
),
pp. 2728–2741
.
External Links:
Document
,
1708.05204
Cited by:
§12
.
G. Hazra and A. R. Choudhuri (2019)
A New Formula for Predicting Solar Cycles
.
\apj
880
(
2
),
pp. 113
.
External Links:
Document
,
1811.01363
Cited by:
Table 1
,
§8
,
§9
.
G. Hazra, D. Nandy, L. Kitchatinov, and A. R. Choudhuri (2023)
Mean Field Models of Flux Transport Dynamo and Meridional Circulation in the Sun and Stars
.
\ssr
219
(
5
),
pp. 39
.
External Links:
Document
,
2302.09390
Cited by:
§4.2
.
M. He and H. Zhu (2024)
Correlating sunspot numbers with Alfvén and Magnetosonic Mach number across last four solar cycles and prediction of solar cycle 25 with LSTM+model
.
Advances in Space Research
74
(
10
),
pp. 5244–5251
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
H. R. Helal and A.A. Galal (2013)
An early prediction of the maximum amplitude of the solar cycle 25
.
Journal of Advanced Research
4
(
3
),
pp. 275 – 278
.
External Links:
ISSN 2090-1232
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
Table 1
.
K. M. Hiremath (2008)
Prediction of solar cycle 24 and beyond
.
\apss
314
(
1-3
),
pp. 45–49
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
R. Howe (2009)
Solar Interior Rotation and its Variation
.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics
6
(
1
),
pp. 1
.
External Links:
Document
,
0902.2406
Cited by:
§4
.
H. Iijima, H. Hotta, S. Imada, K. Kusano, and D. Shiota (2017)
Improvement of solar-cycle prediction: Plateau of solar axial dipole moment
.
\aap
607
,
pp. L2
.
External Links:
Document
,
1710.06528
Cited by:
Table 1
,
§5
.
V. G. Ivanov (2022)
Solar Cycle 25 Prediction Using Length-to-Amplitude Relations
.
\solphys
297
(
7
),
pp. 92
.
External Links:
Document
,
2203.02028
Cited by:
Table 1
.
J. Janssens (2021)
Prediction of the amplitude of solar cycle 25 using polar faculae observations
.
Journal of Space Weather and Space Climate
11
,
pp. 3
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
,
§7
.
P. Jaswal, C. Saha, and D. Nandy (2024)
Discovery of a relation between the decay rate of the Sun’s magnetic dipole and the growth rate of the following sunspot cycle: a new precursor for solar cycle prediction
.
\mnras
528
(
1
),
pp. L27–L32
.
External Links:
Document
,
2307.00520
Cited by:
Table 1
.
J. Javaraiah (2015)
Long-term variations in the north-south asymmetry of solar activity and solar cycle prediction, III: Prediction for the amplitude of solar cycle 25
.
\na
34
,
pp. 54–64
.
External Links:
Document
,
1407.0554
Cited by:
Table 1
.
J. Javaraiah (2021)
North–south asymmetry in solar activity and Solar Cycle prediction, V: prediction for the north–south asymmetry in the amplitude of Solar Cycle 25
.
\apss
366
(
1
),
pp. 16
.
External Links:
Document
,
2101.10126
Cited by:
Table 1
.
J. Javaraiah (2022)
Long-Term Variations in Solar Activity: Predictions for Amplitude and North-South Asymmetry of Solar Cycle 25
.
\solphys
297
(
3
),
pp. 33
.
External Links:
Document
,
2202.13838
Cited by:
Table 1
.
J. Javaraiah (2023)
Prediction for the amplitude and second maximum of Solar Cycle 25 and a comparison of the predictions based on strength of polar magnetic field and low-latitude sunspot area
.
\mnras
520
(
4
),
pp. 5586–5599
.
External Links:
Document
,
2302.12615
Cited by:
Table 1
.
B. K. Jha, B. B. Karak, S. Mandal, and D. Banerjee (2020)
Magnetic Field Dependence of Bipolar Magnetic Region Tilts on the Sun: Indication of Tilt Quenching
.
\apjl
889
(
1
),
pp. L19
.
External Links:
Document
,
1912.13223
Cited by:
§11.2
.
B. K. Jha, A. Priyadarshi, S. Mandal, S. Chatterjee, and D. Banerjee (2021)
Measurements of Solar Differential Rotation Using the Century Long Kodaikanal Sunspot Data
.
\solphys
296
(
1
),
pp. 25
.
External Links:
Document
,
2101.01941
Cited by:
§4
.
B. K. Jha, L. A. Upton, G. Kopp, and O. Coddington (2025)
Historical Reconstruction of Solar Surface Magnetism from Cycle 1-24 Using the Synthetic Active Region Generator (SARG) and the Advective Flux Transport (AFT) Model
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2511.19371
.
External Links:
Document
,
2511.19371
Cited by:
§5
.
B. K. Jha and L. A. Upton (2024)
Predicting the Timing of the Solar Cycle 25 Polar Field Reversal
.
\apjl
962
(
1
),
pp. L15
.
External Links:
Document
,
2401.10502
Cited by:
§10.1
.
J. Jiang, R. H. Cameron, D. Schmitt, and M. Schüssler (2011)
The solar magnetic field since 1700. I. Characteristics of sunspot group emergence and reconstruction of the butterfly diagram
.
\aap
528
,
pp. A82
.
External Links:
Document
,
1102.1266
Cited by:
§5
.
J. Jiang, R. H. Cameron, and M. Schüssler (2014)
Effects of the Scatter in Sunspot Group Tilt Angles on the Large-scale Magnetic Field at the Solar Surface
.
\apj
791
,
pp. 5
.
External Links:
1406.5564
,
Document
Cited by:
§11.1
,
§11.2
.
J. Jiang, P. Chatterjee, and A. R. Choudhuri (2007)
Solar activity forecast with a dynamo model
.
\mnras
381
,
pp. 1527–1542
.
External Links:
0707.2258
,
Document
Cited by:
§12
,
§6
,
§7
,
§8
.
J. Jiang, E. Işik, R. H. Cameron, D. Schmitt, and M. Schüssler (2010)
The Effect of Activity-related Meridional Flow Modulation on the Strength of the Solar Polar Magnetic Field
.
\apj
717
(
1
),
pp. 597–602
.
External Links:
Document
,
1005.5317
Cited by:
§11.2
.
J. Jiang, J. Wang, Q. Jiao, and J. Cao (2018a)
Predictability of the Solar Cycle Over One Cycle
.
\apj
863
(
2
),
pp. 159
.
External Links:
Document
,
1807.01543
Cited by:
§12
.
J. Jiang, J. Wang, Q. Jiao, and J. Cao (2018b)
Predictability of the solar cycle over one cycle
.
The Astrophysical Journal
863
(
2
),
pp. 159
.
Cited by:
Table 1
,
§10.2
,
§10.2
,
§12
,
§12
,
§5
.
J. Jiang (2020)
Nonlinear Mechanisms that Regulate the Solar Cycle Amplitude
.
\apj
900
(
1
),
pp. 19
.
External Links:
Document
,
2007.07069
Cited by:
§11.1
,
§11.2
,
§11.2
.
Q. Jiao, J. Jiang, and Z. Wang (2021)
Sunspot tilt angles revisited: Dependence on the solar cycle strength
.
\aap
653
,
pp. A27
.
External Links:
Document
,
2106.11615
Cited by:
§11.2
.
J. A. Joselyn, J. B. Anderson, H. Coffey, K. Harvey, D. Hathaway, G. Heckman, E. Hildner, W. Mende, K. Schatten, R. Thompson, A. W. P. Thomson, and O. R. White (1997)
Panel achieves consensus prediction of solar cycle 23
.
EOS Transactions
78
(
20
),
pp. 205–205
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
L. Jouve, M. R. E. Proctor, and G. Lesur (2010)
Buoyancy-induced time delays in Babcock-Leighton flux-transport dynamo models
.
\aap
519
,
pp. A68
.
External Links:
Document
,
1005.2283
Cited by:
§6
.
B. Kakad, A. Kakad, and D. S. Ramesh (2017)
Shannon Entropy-Based Prediction of Solar Cycle 25
.
\solphys
292
(
7
),
pp. 95
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
B. Kakad and A. Kakad (2021)
Forecasting peak smooth sunspot number of solar cycle 25: A method based on even-odd pair of solar cycle
.
Planet. Space Sci.
209
,
pp. 105359
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
B. Kakad, R. Kumar, and A. Kakad (2020)
Randomness in Sunspot Number: A Clue to Predict Solar Cycle 25
.
\solphys
295
(
6
),
pp. 88
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
M. Y. Kalkan, D. E. Fawzy, and A. T. Saygac (2023)
Predictions of solar activity cycles 25 and 26 using non-linear autoregressive exogenous neural networks
.
\mnras
523
(
1
),
pp. 1175–1181
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
R. P. Kane (2007)
Solar Cycle Predictions Based on Extrapolation of Spectral Components: An Update
.
\solphys
246
(
2
),
pp. 487–493
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
B. B. Karak and A. R. Choudhuri (2011)
The Waldmeier effect and the flux transport solar dynamo
.
\mnras
410
,
pp. 1503–1512
.
External Links:
1008.0824
,
Document
Cited by:
§8
.
B. B. Karak and A. R. Choudhuri (2012)
Quenching of Meridional Circulation in Flux Transport Dynamo Models
.
\solphys
278
,
pp. 137–148
.
External Links:
1111.1540
,
Document
Cited by:
§11.2
.
B. B. Karak, J. Jiang, M. S. Miesch, P. Charbonneau, and A. R. Choudhuri (2014a)
Flux Transport Dynamos: From Kinematics to Dynamics
.
\ssr
186
,
pp. 561–602
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§4.2
.
B. B. Karak, P. J. Käpylä, M. J. Käpylä, A. Brandenburg, N. Olspert, and J. Pelt (2015a)
Magnetically controlled stellar differential rotation near the transition from solar to anti-solar profiles
.
\aap
576
,
pp. A26
.
External Links:
1407.0984
,
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
B. B. Karak, L. L. Kitchatinov, and A. Brandenburg (2015b)
Hysteresis between Distinct Modes of Turbulent Dynamos
.
\apj
803
,
pp. 95
.
External Links:
1411.0485
,
Document
Cited by:
§4.1
.
B. B. Karak, L. L. Kitchatinov, and A. R. Choudhuri (2014b)
A Dynamo Model of Magnetic Activity in Solar-like Stars with Different Rotational Velocities
.
\apj
791
,
pp. 59
.
External Links:
1402.1874
,
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
B. B. Karak and M. Miesch (2017)
Solar Cycle Variability Induced by Tilt Angle Scatter in a Babcock-Leighton Solar Dynamo Model
.
\apj
847
,
pp. 69
.
External Links:
1706.08933
,
Document
Cited by:
§11.1
,
§11.2
.
B. B. Karak and M. Miesch (2018)
Recovery from Maunder-like Grand Minima in a Babcock–Leighton Solar Dynamo Model
.
\apjl
860
,
pp. L26
.
External Links:
1712.10130
,
Document
Cited by:
§11.1
.
B. B. Karak and D. Nandy (2012)
Turbulent Pumping of Magnetic Flux Reduces Solar Cycle Memory and thus Impacts Predictability of the Sun’s Activity
.
\apjl
761
,
pp. L13
.
External Links:
1206.2106
,
Document
Cited by:
§12
,
§6
.
B. B. Karak (2010)
Importance of Meridional Circulation in Flux Transport Dynamo: The Possibility of a Maunder-like Grand Minimum
.
\apj
724
,
pp. 1021–1029
.
External Links:
1009.2479
,
Document
Cited by:
§8
,
§9
.
B. B. Karak, S. Mandal, and D. Banerjee (2018a)
Double Peaks of the Solar Cycle: An Explanation from a Dynamo Model
.
\apj
866
(
1
),
pp. 17
.
External Links:
Document
,
1808.03922
Cited by:
footnote 1
.
B. B. Karak, M. Miesch, and Y. Bekki (2018b)
Consequences of high effective Prandtl number on solar differential rotation and convective velocity
.
Physics of Fluids
30
(
4
),
pp. 046602
.
External Links:
Document
,
1801.00560
Cited by:
§4
.
B. B. Karak, S. Mishra, and A. Sreedevi (2026)
Variation of the sunspot area during the rising and declining phases of the solar cycle supports the toroidal flux loss due to flux emergence
.
\mnras
546
(
4
),
pp. stag220
.
External Links:
Document
,
2602.07194
Cited by:
§1
,
§10.2
,
§11.2
,
§3
.
B. B. Karak and K. Petrovay (2013)
On the Compatibility of a Flux Transport Dynamo with a Fast Tachocline Scenario
.
\solphys
282
(
2
),
pp. 321–334
.
External Links:
Document
,
1209.0319
Cited by:
§4.2
.
B. B. Karak (2020)
Dynamo Saturation through the Latitudinal Variation of Bipolar Magnetic Regions in the Sun
.
\apjl
901
(
2
),
pp. L35
.
External Links:
Document
,
2009.06969
Cited by:
§11.2
.
B. B. Karak (2023)
Models for the long-term variations of solar activity
.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics
20
(
1
),
pp. 3
.
External Links:
Document
,
2305.17188
Cited by:
§1
,
§11.1
,
§4
.
B. B. Karak (2024)
Recent Developments in the Babcock-Leighton Solar Dynamo Theory
.
In
Dynamics of Solar and Stellar Convection Zones and Atmospheres
,
A. V. Getling and L. L. Kitchatinov (Eds.)
,
IAU Symposium
, Vol.
365
,
pp. 87–97
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
L. L. Kichatinov and G. Rudiger (1993)
LAMDA-effect and differential rotation in stellar convection zones.
.
\aap
276
,
pp. 96–102
.
Cited by:
§4
.
R. Kippenhahn (1963)
Differential Rotation in Stars with Convective Envelopes.
.
\apj
137
,
pp. 664
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
B. Kirov, S. Asenovski, K. Georgieva, V. N. Obridko, and G. Maris-Muntean (2018)
Forecasting the sunspot maximum through an analysis of geomagnetic activity
.
Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics
176
,
pp. 42–50
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
L. L. Kitchatinov and S. V. Olemskoy (2011a)
Differential rotation of main-sequence dwarfs and its dynamo efficiency
.
\mnras
411
,
pp. 1059–1066
.
External Links:
1009.3734
,
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
L. L. Kitchatinov and S. V. Olemskoy (2011b)
Does the Babcock-Leighton mechanism operate on the Sun?
.
Astronomy Letters
37
,
pp. 656–658
.
External Links:
1109.1351
,
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
L. L. Kitchatinov (2016)
Meridional circulation in the sun and stars
.
Geomagnetism and Aeronomy
56
(
8
),
pp. 945–951
.
External Links:
Document
,
1603.07852
Cited by:
§4
.
L. Kitchatinov and A. Nepomnyashchikh (2017)
How supercritical are stellar dynamos, or why do old main-sequence dwarfs not obey gyrochronology?
.
\mnras
470
(
3
),
pp. 3124–3130
.
External Links:
Document
,
1706.02814
Cited by:
§4.1
.
I. N. Kitiashvili (2016)
Data Assimilation Approach for Forecast of Solar Activity Cycles
.
\apj
831
(
1
),
pp. 15
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
N. Kleeorin, K. Kuzanyan, N. Safiullin, I. Rogachevskii, V. Obridko, S. Porshnev, and R. Stepanov (2024)
Forecast of solar activity based on mean-field dynamo model and neural network
.
Astronomical and Astrophysical Transactions
34
(
4
),
pp. 371–388
.
External Links:
Document
,
2411.10380
Cited by:
Table 1
.
D. V. Kostarev (2026)
Space weather impact on ground-based infrastructure
.
Izvestiya, Physics of the Solid Earth
(
2
),
pp. 234–256
.
External Links:
ISSN 0002-3337
,
Link
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Koutchmy, B. Filippov, E. Tavabi, J.-C. Noëns, and O. Wurmser (2022)
Polar regions activity and the prediction of the height of the solar cycle 25 Solar Cycle 25
.
Acta Astrophysica Taurica
3
(
2
),
pp. 12–16
.
External Links:
Document
,
2205.09089
Cited by:
Table 1
.
F. Krause and K. H. Rädler (1980)
Mean-field magnetohydrodynamics and dynamo theory
.
Oxford: Pergamon Press
.
Cited by:
§4
.
A. Kumar and V. Kumar (2023)
Stacked 1D Convolutional LSTM (sConvLSTM1D) Model for Effective Prediction of Sunspot Time Series
.
\solphys
298
(
10
),
pp. 121
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
P. Kumar, A. Biswas, and B. B. Karak (2022)
Physical link of the polar field buildup with the Waldmeier effect broadens the scope of early solar cycle prediction: Cycle 25 is likely to be slightly stronger than Cycle 24
.
\mnras
513
(
1
),
pp. L112–L116
.
External Links:
Document
,
2203.11494
Cited by:
Table 1
,
Figure 12
,
§10.1
,
§12
,
§12
,
§3
.
P. Kumar, B. B. Karak, and A. Sreedevi (2024)
Variabilities in the polar field and solar cycle due to irregular properties of bipolar magnetic regions
.
\mnras
530
(
3
),
pp. 2895–2905
.
External Links:
Document
,
2404.10526
Cited by:
§11.1
,
§11.2
.
P. Kumar, B. B. Karak, and V. Vashishth (2021a)
Supercriticality of the Dynamo Limits the Memory of the Polar Field to One Cycle
.
\apj
913
(
1
),
pp. 65
.
External Links:
Document
,
2103.11754
Cited by:
§6
.
P. Kumar, M. Nagy, A. Lemerle, B. B. Karak, and K. Petrovay (2021b)
The Polar Precursor Method for Solar Cycle Prediction: Comparison of Predictors and Their Temporal Range
.
\apj
909
(
1
),
pp. 87
.
External Links:
Document
,
2101.05013
Cited by:
Table 1
,
Figure 11
,
§10.1
,
§12
,
§12
,
§3
,
§7
,
§9
.
P. Kumar, B. Ravindra, P. Chowdhury, and B. B. Karak (2026)
Quasi-biennial oscillations and Rieger-type periodicities in a Babcock-Leighton solar dynamo
.
\aap
705
,
pp. A66
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§11.1
.
R. Kumar, L. Jouve, and D. Nandy (2019)
A 3D kinematic Babcock Leighton solar dynamo model sustained by dynamic magnetic buoyancy and flux transport processes
.
\aap
623
,
pp. A54
.
External Links:
Document
,
1901.04251
Cited by:
§4.2
.
V. Kumar (2024)
Enhancing Solar Cycle 25 and 26 Forecasting with Vipin-Deep-Decomposed-Recomposed Rolling-window (vD2R2w) Model on Sunspot Number Observations
.
\solphys
299
(
10
),
pp. 147
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
F. Labonville, P. Charbonneau, and A. Lemerle (2019)
A Dynamo-based Forecast of Solar Cycle 25
.
\solphys
294
(
6
),
pp. 82
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
,
§10.2
,
§10.2
.
T. Lee (2020)
EMD and LSTM Hybrid Deep Learning Model for Predicting Sunspot Number Time Series with a Cyclic Pattern
.
\solphys
295
(
6
),
pp. 82
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
R. B. Leighton (1964)
Transport of Magnetic Fields on the Sun.
.
\apj
140
,
pp. 1547
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
,
§3
.
R. B. Leighton (1969)
A Magneto-Kinematic Model of the Solar Cycle
.
\apj
156
,
pp. 1
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
A. Lemerle and P. Charbonneau (2017)
A Coupled 2
×
{\times}
2D Babcock-Leighton Solar Dynamo Model. II. Reference Dynamo Solutions
.
\apj
834
,
pp. 133
.
External Links:
1606.07375
,
Document
Cited by:
§11.2
.
B. Li, J. Jiang, and Y. Luo (2026)
Understanding mechanisms underlying solar cycle predictability with a general framework
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2604.13585
.
External Links:
2604.13585
Cited by:
§6
.
F.Y. Li, D.F. Kong, J.L. Xie, N.B. Xiang, and J.C. Xu (2018)
Solar cycle characteristics and their application in the prediction of cycle 25
.
Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics
181
,
pp. 110 – 115
.
External Links:
ISSN 1364-6826
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
Table 1
.
K.J. Li, W. Feng, and F.Y. Li (2015)
Predicting the maximum amplitude of solar cycle 25 and its timing
.
Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics
135
,
pp. 72 – 76
.
External Links:
ISSN 1364-6826
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
Table 1
.
Q. Li, M. Wan, S. Zeng, S. Zheng, and L. Deng (2021)
Predicting the 25th solar cycle using deep learning methods based on sunspot area data
.
Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics
21
(
7
),
pp. 184
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
X. Liu, S. Zeng, L. Deng, X. Zeng, and S. Zheng (2023)
Predicting the 25th and 26th solar cycles using the long short-term memory method
.
\pasj
75
(
3
),
pp. 691–699
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
M. Lockwood, M. J. Owens, L. A. Barnard, C. J. Scott, C. E. Watt, and S. Bentley (2018)
Space climate and space weather over the past 400 years: 2. Proxy indicators of geomagnetic storm and substorm occurrence
.
Journal of Space Weather and Space Climate
8
,
pp. A12
.
External Links:
Document
,
1801.02434
Cited by:
§1
.
D. W. Longcope and I. Klapper (1997)
Dynamics of a Thin Twisted Flux Tube
.
The Astrophysical Journal
488
(
1
),
pp. 443–453
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§11.2
.
V. G. Lozitsky and V. M. Efimenko (2023)
Early Forecast of a Maximum in the 25th Cycle of Solar Activity
.
Kinematics and Physics of Celestial Bodies
39
(
1
),
pp. 45–48
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
J. Y. Lu, Y. T. Xiong, K. Zhao, M. Wang, J. Y. Li, G. S. Peng, and M. Sun (2022)
A Novel Bimodal Forecasting Model for Solar Cycle 25
.
\apj
924
(
2
),
pp. 59
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
P. Luo and B. Tan (2024)
Long-term Evolution of Solar Activity and Prediction of the Following Solar Cycles
.
Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics
24
(
3
),
pp. 035016
.
External Links:
Document
,
2402.13173
Cited by:
Table 1
.
A. Macario-Rojas, K. L. Smith, and P. C. E. Roberts (2018)
Solar activity simulation and forecast with a flux-transport dynamo
.
\mnras
479
(
3
),
pp. 3791–3803
.
External Links:
Document
,
1806.10733
Cited by:
Table 1
.
V. I. Makarov, A. G. Tlatov, D. K. Callebaut, V. N. Obridko, and B. D. Shelting (2001)
Large-Scale Magnetic Field and Sunspot Cycles
.
\solphys
198
(
2
),
pp. 409–421
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Figure 13
,
§11
,
§3
,
Figure 10
,
§9
.
S. Mandal, B. B. Karak, and D. Banerjee (2017)
Latitude Distribution of Sunspots: Analysis Using Sunspot Data and a Dynamo Model
.
\apj
851
,
pp. 70
.
External Links:
1711.00222
,
Document
Cited by:
§11.2
.
S. Mandal, N. A. Krivova, S. K. Solanki, N. Sinha, and D. Banerjee (2020)
Sunspot area catalog revisited: Daily cross-calibrated areas since 1874
.
\aap
640
,
pp. A78
.
External Links:
Document
,
2004.14618
Cited by:
Figure 13
.
B. H. McClintock, A. A. Norton, and J. Li (2014)
Re-examining Sunspot Tilt Angle to Include Anti-Hale Statistics
.
\apj
797
,
pp. 130
.
External Links:
1412.5094
,
Document
Cited by:
§11.1
.
S. W. McIntosh, R. J. Leamon, L. D. Krista, A. M. Title, H. S. Hudson, P. Riley, J. W. Harder, G. Kopp, M. Snow, T. N. Woods, J. C. Kasper, M. L. Stevens, and R. K. Ulrich (2015)
The solar magnetic activity band interaction and instabilities that shape quasi-periodic variability
.
Nature Communications
6
,
pp. 6491
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
S. W. McIntosh, S. Chapman, R. J. Leamon, R. Egeland, and N. W. Watkins (2020)
Overlapping Magnetic Activity Cycles and the Sunspot Number: Forecasting Sunspot Cycle 25 Amplitude
.
\solphys
295
(
12
),
pp. 163
.
External Links:
Document
,
2006.15263
Cited by:
Table 1
.
T. S. Metcalfe, R. Egeland, and J. van Saders (2016)
Stellar Evidence That the Solar Dynamo May Be in Transition
.
\apjl
826
(
1
),
pp. L2
.
External Links:
Document
,
1606.01926
Cited by:
§4.1
.
T. S. Metcalfe, J. L. van Saders, M. H. Pinsonneault, T. R. Ayres, O. Kochukhov, K. G. Stassun, A. J. Finley, V. See, I. V. Ilyin, and K. G. Strassmeier (2025)
Weakened Magnetic Braking Signals the Collapse of the Global Stellar Dynamo
.
\apjl
991
(
1
),
pp. L17
.
External Links:
Document
,
2509.03717
Cited by:
§4.1
.
J. Miao, X. Wang, T. Ren, and Z. Li (2020)
Prediction verification of solar cycles 18-24 and a preliminary prediction of the maximum amplitude of solar cycle 25 based on the Precursor Method
.
Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics
20
(
1
),
pp. 004
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
M. S. Miesch and M. Dikpati (2014)
A Three-dimensional Babcock-Leighton Solar Dynamo Model
.
\apjl
785
,
pp. L8
.
External Links:
1401.6557
,
Document
Cited by:
§4.2
.
M. S. Miesch and K. Teweldebirhan (2016)
A three-dimensional Babcock-Leighton solar dynamo model: Initial results with axisymmetric flows
.
Advances in Space Research
58
(
8
),
pp. 1571–1588
.
External Links:
Document
,
1511.03613
Cited by:
§4.2
,
§5
.
M. S. Miesch (2025)
Solar Cycle Prediction at NOAA’s Space Weather Prediction Center
.
Space Weather
23
(
6
),
pp. e2025SW004444
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§12
.
D. K. Mishra, B. K. Jha, T. Chatzistergos, I. Ermolli, D. Banerjee, L. A. Upton, and M. S. Khan (2025)
Ca II K Polar Network Index of the Sun: A Proxy for Historical Polar Magnetic Field
.
\apj
982
(
2
),
pp. 78
.
External Links:
Document
,
2502.01371
Cited by:
§3
,
§9
.
R. Miteva, S. W. Samwel, and S. Tkatchova (2023)
Space Weather Effects on Satellites
.
Astronomy
2
(
3
),
pp. 165–179
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
H. K. Moffatt (1978)
Magnetic field generation in electrically conducting fluids
.
Cited by:
§3
.
A. V. Mordvinov, B. B. Karak, D. Banerjee, S. Chatterjee, E. M. Golubeva, and A. I. Khlystova (2020)
Long-term Evolution of the Sun’s Magnetic Field during Cycles 15-19 Based on Their Proxies from Kodaikanal Solar Observatory
.
\apjl
902
(
1
),
pp. L15
.
External Links:
Document
,
2009.11174
Cited by:
§11.1
,
§3
.
A. V. Mordvinov, B. B. Karak, D. Banerjee, E. M. Golubeva, A. I. Khlystova, A. V. Zhukova, and P. Kumar (2022)
Evolution of the Sun’s activity and the poleward transport of remnant magnetic flux in Cycles 21-24
.
\mnras
510
(
1
),
pp. 1331–1339
.
External Links:
Document
,
2111.15585
Cited by:
§10.1
,
§11.1
,
§3
.
A. Muñoz-Jaramillo, M. Dasi-Espuig, L. A. Balmaceda, and E. E. DeLuca (2013)
Solar Cycle Propagation, Memory, and Prediction: Insights from a Century of Magnetic Proxies
.
\apjl
767
,
pp. L25
.
External Links:
1304.3151
,
Document
Cited by:
§11
,
§3
,
§3
.
A. Muñoz-Jaramillo, N. R. Sheeley, J. Zhang, and E. E. DeLuca (2012)
Calibrating 100 Years of Polar Faculae Measurements: Implications for the Evolution of the Heliospheric Magnetic Field
.
\apj
753
(
2
),
pp. 146
.
External Links:
Document
,
1303.0345
Cited by:
§9
.
K. Mursula, I. G. Usoskin, and G. Maris (2007)
Introduction to Space Climate
.
Advances in Space Research
40
(
7
),
pp. 885–887
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
Y. A. Nagovitsyn and V. G. Ivanov (2023)
Solar Cycle Pairing and Prediction of Cycle 25
.
\solphys
298
(
3
),
pp. 37
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
Yu. A. Nagovitsyn and V. G. Ivanov (2022)
Addition to the Gnevyshev-Ohl rule and prediction of solar cycle 25
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2208.00101
.
External Links:
Document
,
2208.00101
Cited by:
Table 1
.
M. Nagy, A. Lemerle, F. Labonville, K. Petrovay, and P. Charbonneau (2017)
The Effect of “Rogue” Active Regions on the Solar Cycle
.
\solphys
292
,
pp. 167
.
External Links:
1712.02185
,
Document
Cited by:
§11.1
.
D. Nandy and A. R. Choudhuri (2002)
Explaining the Latitudinal Distribution of Sunspots with Deep Meridional Flow
.
Science
296
(
5573
),
pp. 1671–1673
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
D. Nandy, V. Pant, M. Anand, J. J. Athalathil, A. K. Awasthi, K. Bane, D. Banerjee, B. Ravindra, A. Bhaskar, R. Bhattacharyya, P. Bhowmik, R. Chandra, P. Chatterjee, S. Chatterjee, A. P. Dimri, S. A. Gokani, S. Hanasoge, S. Hazra, R. Jain, B. Joshi, K. Nagaraju, D. Kansabanik, B. B. Karak, C. Kathiravan, R. Khan, H. Krishnan, B. Kumar, S. Kumar, A. Kumari, S. Majumdar, P. Mayank, S. Mishra, W. Mishra, A. Mohan, S. Mondal, V. Mugundhan, S. Narendranath, D. Oberoi, M. Pandya, R. Patel, A. Paul, A. Prasad, K. S. Raja, A. Rajhans, R. Ramesh, C. Saha, K. Sankarasanubramanian, R. Selvakumaran, R. Sharma, R. Sharma, A. K. Shrivastav, N. Singh, S. Lata Soni, A. K. Srivastava, N. Srivastava, D. Tripathi, W. Uddin, B. Vaidya, P. Vemareddy, G. Vichare, G. Vigeesh, N. Yadav, and V. K. Yadav (2025)
Indian solar and heliospheric physics vision: Fundamental science to a space weather resilient society
.
Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy
46
(
2
),
pp. 51
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
D. Nandy (2021)
Progress in Solar Cycle Predictions: Sunspot Cycles 24-25 in Perspective
.
\solphys
296
(
3
),
pp. 54
.
External Links:
Document
,
2009.01908
Cited by:
§1
,
§11
,
Figure 5
,
§2
.
G. A. L. Nogueira, R. Erdelyi, R. Wang, and K. Petrovay (2026)
Solar active region scaling laws revisited
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2602.13677
.
External Links:
Document
,
2602.13677
Cited by:
§12
.
V. Obridko, D. Sokoloff, and M. Katsova (2023)
Estimates of the height and date of the 25th cycle of solar activity
.
Astronomicheskij Tsirkulyar
1658
,
pp. 1
.
External Links:
Document
,
2307.05725
Cited by:
Table 1
.
D. I. Okoh, G. K. Seemala, A. B. Rabiu, J. Uwamahoro, J. B. Habarulema, and M. Aggarwal (2018)
A Hybrid Regression-Neural Network (HR-NN) Method for Forecasting the Solar Activity
.
Space Weather
16
(
9
),
pp. 1424–1436
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
,
Table 1
.
D. M. Oliveira and E. Zesta (2019)
Satellite Orbital Drag During Magnetic Storms
.
Space Weather
17
(
11
),
pp. 1510–1533
.
External Links:
Document
,
1910.09622
Cited by:
§1
.
D. M. Oliveira, R. C. Allen, L. R. Alves, S. P. Blake, B. A. Carter, D. Chakrabarty, G. D’Angelo, K. Delano, E. Echer, C. P. Ferradas, M. G. Finley, B. Gallardo-Lacourt, D. Gershman, J. W. Gjerloev, J. B. Habarulema, M. D. Hartinger, R. Hajra, H. Hayakawa, L. Juusola, K. M. Laundal, R. J. Leamon, M. Madelaire, M. Martínez-Ledesma, S. M. McIntosh, Y. Miyoshi, M. B. Moldwin, E. Nahayo, D. Nandy, B. Nilam, K. Nykyri, W. R. Paterson, M. Piersanti, E. Pietropaolo, C. J. Rodger, T. Shah, A. W. Smith, N. Srivastava, B. T. Tsurutani, S. T. Ram, L. A. Upton, B. Veenadhari, S. Vidal-Luengo, A. Viljanen, S. K. Vines, V. K. Yadav, J. Yee, J. W. Weygand, and E. Zesta (2024)
Predicting Interplanetary Shock Occurrence for Solar Cycle 25: Opportunities and Challenges in Space Weather Research
.
Space Weather
22
(
8
),
pp. e2024SW003964
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
M. J. Owens, M. Lockwood, L. A. Barnard, C. J. Scott, C. Haines, and A. Macneil (2021)
Extreme Space-Weather Events and the Solar Cycle
.
\solphys
296
(
5
),
pp. 82
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Pal and D. Nandy (2024)
Algebraic quantification of the contribution of active regions to the Sun’s dipole moment: applications to century-scale polar field estimates and solar cycle forecasting
.
\mnras
531
(
1
),
pp. 1546–1553
.
External Links:
Document
,
2312.15703
Cited by:
Table 1
.
Z. Pala and R. Atici (2019)
Forecasting Sunspot Time Series Using Deep Learning Methods
.
\solphys
294
(
5
),
pp. 50
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
E. N. Parker (1955)
Hydromagnetic Dynamo Models.
.
\apj
122
,
pp. 293
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
E. N. Parker (1975)
The generation of magnetic fields in astrophysical bodies. X - Magnetic buoyancy and the solar dynamo
.
\apj
198
,
pp. 205–209
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
E. N. Parker (1979)
Cosmical magnetic fields: Their origin and their activity
.
Cited by:
§3
.
V. Penza, F. Berrilli, L. Bertello, M. Cantoresi, and S. Criscuoli (2021)
Prediction of Sunspot and Plage Coverage for Solar Cycle 25
.
\apjl
922
(
1
),
pp. L12
.
External Links:
Document
,
2111.02928
Cited by:
Table 1
.
W. D. Pesnell (2012)
Solar Cycle Predictions (Invited Review)
.
\solphys
281
,
pp. 507–532
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§2
.
W. D. Pesnell and K. H. Schatten (2018)
An Early Prediction of the Amplitude of Solar Cycle 25
.
\solphys
293
(
7
),
pp. 112
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
,
§7
.
W. D. Pesnell (2024)
An Interesting Correlation Between the Peak Slope and Peak Value of a Sunspot Cycle
.
\solphys
299
(
2
),
pp. 14
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
K. Petrovay, M. Nagy, T. Gerják, and L. Juhász (2018)
Precursors of an upcoming solar cycle at high latitudes from coronal green line data
.
Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics
176
,
pp. 15–20
.
External Links:
Document
,
1802.05628
Cited by:
Table 1
.
K. Petrovay, M. Nagy, and A. R. Yeates (2020)
Towards an algebraic method of solar cycle prediction. I. Calculating the ultimate dipole contributions of individual active regions
.
Journal of Space Weather and Space Climate
10
,
pp. 50
.
External Links:
Document
,
2009.02299
Cited by:
§11.1
.
K. Petrovay (2010)
Solar Cycle Prediction
.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics
7
(
1
),
pp. 6
.
External Links:
Document
,
1012.5513
Cited by:
§1
.
K. Petrovay (2020)
Solar cycle prediction
.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics
17
(
1
),
pp. 2
.
External Links:
Document
,
1907.02107
Cited by:
§1
,
§11.2
.
K. Petrovay (2024)
Predicting Solar Cycles with a Parametric Time Series Model
.
Universe
10
(
9
),
pp. 364
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
M. I. Pishkalo and I. E. Vasiljeva (2023)
Predicting the Maximum of Solar Cycle 25: Total Power at the Cycle’s Beginning and in the Previous Cycle as Precursor
.
Kinematics and Physics of Celestial Bodies
39
(
4
),
pp. 225–238
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
M. I. Pishkalo (2008)
Preliminary prediction of solar cycles 24 and 25 based on the correlation between cycle parameters
.
Kinematics and Physics of Celestial Bodies
24
(
5
),
pp. 242
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
M. I. Pishkalo (2010)
Prediction of Amplitude of Solar Cycle 24 Based on Polar Magnetic Field of the Sun at Cycle Minimum
.
Sun and Geosphere
5
,
pp. 47–51
.
Cited by:
§7
.
M. I. Pishkalo (2021)
Prediction of Solar Cycle 25: Maximum in the N- and S-Hemispheres
.
Kinematics and Physics of Celestial Bodies
37
(
1
),
pp. 27–32
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
T. Podladchikova, S. Jain, A. M. Veronig, O. Sutyrina, M. Dumbović, F. Clette, and W. Pötzi (2022)
Maximal growth rate of the ascending phase of a sunspot cycle for predicting its amplitude
.
\aap
663
,
pp. A88
.
External Links:
Document
,
2206.12606
Cited by:
Table 1
.
T. Podladchikova, R. Van der Linden, and A. M. Veronig (2017)
Sunspot Number Second Differences as a Precursor of the Following 11-year Sunspot Cycle
.
\apj
850
(
1
),
pp. 81
.
External Links:
Document
,
1712.05782
Cited by:
Table 1
.
A. Prasad, S. Roy, A. Sarkar, S. Chandra Panja, and S. Narayan Patra (2022)
Prediction of solar cycle 25 using deep learning based long short-term memory forecasting technique
.
Advances in Space Research
69
(
1
),
pp. 798–813
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
A. Prasad, S. Roy, A. Sarkar, S. C. Panja, and S. N. Patra (2023)
An Improved Prediction of Solar Cycle 25 Using Deep Learning Based Neural Network
.
\solphys
298
(
3
),
pp. 50
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
M. Priyal, D. Banerjee, B. B. Karak, A. Muñoz-Jaramillo, B. Ravindra, A. R. Choudhuri, and J. Singh (2014)
Polar Network Index as a Magnetic Proxy for the Solar Cycle Studies
.
\apjl
793
,
pp. L4
.
External Links:
1407.4944
,
Document
Cited by:
§3
,
§9
.
L. Qin, J. Jiang, and R. Wang (2025)
Mutual Validation of Data Sets for Analyzing Tilt Angles in Solar Active Regions
.
\apj
986
(
2
),
pp. 114
.
External Links:
Document
,
2502.11698
Cited by:
§11.2
.
M. S. Quassim, A. Attia, and H. K. Elminir (2007)
Forecasting the Peak Amplitude of the 24th and 25th Sunspot Cycles and Accompanying Geomagnetic Activity
.
\solphys
243
(
2
),
pp. 253–258
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
K. P. Raju, J. Singh, B. Ravindra, and M. Priyal (2023)
Correlation between Supergranular Lane Widths and Sunspot Number; A Simple Way to Predict the Amplitude of Sunspot Cycle
.
\apjl
959
(
2
),
pp. L24
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
N. R. Rigozo, M. P. Souza Echer, H. Evangelista, D. J. R. Nordemann, and E. Echer (2011)
Prediction of sunspot number amplitude and solar cycle length for cycles 24 and 25
.
Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics
73
(
11-12
),
pp. 1294–1299
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
P. Riley (2023)
On the Strength and Duration of Solar Cycle 25: A Novel Quantile-Based Superposed-Epoch Analysis
.
\solphys
298
(
5
),
pp. 66
.
External Links:
Document
,
2210.14384
Cited by:
Table 1
.
J. Rodríguez, V. M. Sánchez Carrasco, I. Rodríguez-Rodríguez, A. J. Pérez Aparicio, and J. M. Vaquero (2024a)
Are we crossing a minimum of the Gleissberg centennial cycle? Multivariate machine learning-based prediction of the sunspot number using different proxies of solar activity and spectral analysis
.
Advances in Space Research
74
(
8
),
pp. 4173–4188
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
J. Rodríguez, V. M. Sánchez Carrasco, I. Rodríguez-Rodríguez, A. J. Pérez Aparicio, and J. M. Vaquero (2024b)
Hemispheric Sunspot Number Prediction for Solar Cycles 25 and 26 Using Spectral Analysis and Machine Learning Techniques
.
\solphys
299
(
8
),
pp. 116
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
G. Ruediger (1989)
Differential rotation and stellar convection. Sun and the solar stars
.
Berlin: Akademie Verlag
.
Cited by:
§4
.
A. Sabarinath and A. K. Anilkumar (2018)
Sunspot cycle prediction using multivariate regression and binary mixture of Laplace distribution model
.
Journal of Earth System Science
127
(
6
),
pp. 84
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
V. Sarp, A. Kilcik, V. Yurchyshyn, J. P. Rozelot, and A. Ozguc (2018)
Prediction of solar cycle 25: a non-linear approach
.
\mnras
481
(
3
),
pp. 2981–2985
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
K. H. Schatten, P. H. Scherrer, L. Svalgaard, and J. M. Wilcox (1978)
Using dynamo theory to predict the sunspot number during solar cycle 21
.
\grl
5
,
pp. 411–414
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§7
.
K. Schatten (2005)
Fair space weather for solar cycle 24
.
\grl
32
(
21
),
pp. L21106
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§7
.
J. Schou, H. M. Antia, S. Basu, R. S. Bogart, R. I. Bush, S. M. Chitre, J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, M. P. Di Mauro, W. A. Dziembowski, A. Eff-Darwich, D. O. Gough, D. A. Haber, J. T. Hoeksema, R. Howe, S. G. Korzennik, A. G. Kosovichev, R. M. Larsen, F. P. Pijpers, P. H. Scherrer, T. Sekii, T. D. Tarbell, A. M. Title, M. J. Thompson, and J. Toomre (1998)
Helioseismic Studies of Differential Rotation in the Solar Envelope by the Solar Oscillations Investigation Using the Michelson Doppler Imager
.
\apj
505
,
pp. 390–417
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
C. J. Schrijver, K. Kauristie, A. D. Aylward, C. M. Denardini, S. E. Gibson, A. Glover, N. Gopalswamy, M. Grande, M. Hapgood, D. Heynderickx, N. Jakowski, V. V. Kalegaev, G. Lapenta, J. A. Linker, S. Liu, C. H. Mandrini, I. R. Mann, T. Nagatsuma, D. Nandy, T. Obara, T. Paul O’Brien, T. Onsager, H. J. Opgenoorth, M. Terkildsen, C. E. Valladares, and N. Vilmer (2015)
Understanding space weather to shield society: A global road map for 2015-2025 commissioned by COSPAR and ILWS
.
Advances in Space Research
55
(
12
),
pp. 2745–2807
.
External Links:
Document
,
1503.06135
Cited by:
§1
.
C. J. Schrijver (2015)
Socio-Economic Hazards and Impacts of Space Weather: The Important Range Between Mild and Extreme
.
Space Weather
13
(
9
),
pp. 524–528
.
External Links:
Document
,
1507.08730
Cited by:
§1
.
H. Schunker, C. Baumgartner, A. C. Birch, R. H. Cameron, D. C. Braun, and L. Gizon (2020)
Average motion of emerging solar active region polarities. II. Joy’s law
.
\aap
640
,
pp. A116
.
External Links:
Document
,
2006.05565
Cited by:
§3
.
H. Schwabe (1844)
Sonnenbeobachtungen im Jahre 1843. Von Herrn Hofrath Schwabe in Dessau
.
Astronomische Nachrichten
21
(
15
),
pp. 233
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Sello (2019)
Solar cycle activity: an early prediction for cycle 25
.
External Links:
1902.05294
Cited by:
Table 1
.
K. Sharma, A. Rajwanshi, S. Kumar, R. M. Das, and N. Srivastava (2024)
Predicting Maximum Amplitude and Rise Time of Solar Cycle 25 Using Modified Geomagnetic Precursor Technique
.
\solphys
299
(
12
),
pp. 167
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
Jr. Sheeley (1991)
Polar Faculae: 1906–1990
.
\apj
374
,
pp. 386
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
A. K. Singh and A. Bhargawa (2017)
An early prediction of 25th solar cycle using Hurst exponent
.
\apss
362
(
11
),
pp. 199
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
A. K. Singh and A. Bhargawa (2019)
Prediction of declining solar activity trends during solar cycles 25 and 26 and indication of other solar minimum
.
\apss
364
(
1
),
pp. 12
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
P. R. Singh, A. I. Saad Farid, A. K. Singh, T. K. Pant, and A. A. Aly (2021)
Predicting the maximum sunspot number and the associated geomagnetic activity indices aa and Ap for solar cycle 25
.
\apss
366
(
5
),
pp. 48
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
S. K. Solanki, T. Wenzler, and D. Schmitt (2008)
Moments of the latitudinal dependence of the sunspot cycle: a new diagnostic of dynamo models
.
\aap
483
,
pp. 623–632
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§11.2
.
H. C. Spruit (1981)
Motion of magnetic flux tubes in the solar convection zone and chromosphere.
.
Astronomy & Astrophysics
98
,
pp. 155–160
.
Cited by:
§11.2
.
A. Sreedevi, B. K. Jha, B. B. Karak, and D. Banerjee (2023)
AutoTAB: Automatic Tracking Algorithm for Bipolar Magnetic Regions
.
\apjs
268
(
2
),
pp. 58
.
External Links:
Document
,
2304.06615
Cited by:
§3
.
A. Sreedevi, B. K. Jha, B. B. Karak, and D. Banerjee (2024)
Analysis of BMR Tilt from AutoTAB Catalog: Hinting toward the Thin Flux Tube Model?
.
\apj
966
(
1
),
pp. 112
.
External Links:
Document
,
2403.09229
Cited by:
§11.2
,
§3
.
A. Sreedevi, B. B. Karak, B. K. Jha, R. Gupta, and D. Banerjee (2025)
Observed Joy’s Law of Bipolar Magnetic Region Tilts at Emergence Supports the Thin Flux Tube Model
.
\apjl
994
(
2
),
pp. L40
.
External Links:
Document
,
2511.03558
Cited by:
§3
.
A. Sreedevi, B. B. Karak, B. K. Jha, R. Gupta, and D. Banerjee (2026)
Backtracking Bipolar Magnetic Regions to Their Emergence: Two Groups and Their Implication in the Tilt Measurements
.
\apj
996
(
1
),
pp. 85
.
External Links:
Document
,
2509.17157
Cited by:
§11.1
.
J. O. Stenflo and A. G. Kosovichev (2012)
Bipolar Magnetic Regions on the Sun: Global Analysis of the SOHO/MDI Data Set
.
\apj
745
,
pp. 129
.
External Links:
1112.5226
,
Document
Cited by:
§11.1
.
X. Su, B. Liang, S. Feng, Y. Cai, W. Dai, and Y. Yang (2024a)
Solar cycle prediction using a combinatorial deep learning model
.
\mnras
527
(
3
),
pp. 5675–5682
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
X. Su, B. Liang, S. Feng, Y. Cai, W. Dai, and Y. Yang (2024b)
Solar cycle prediction using a combinatorial deep learning model
.
\mnras
527
(
3
),
pp. 5675–5682
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
X. Su, B. Liang, S. Feng, W. Dai, and Y. Yang (2023)
Solar Cycle 25 Prediction Using N-BEATS
.
\apj
947
(
2
),
pp. 50
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
L. Svalgaard, E. W. Cliver, and Y. Kamide (2005)
Sunspot cycle 24: smallest cycle in 100 years?
.
Geophysical Research Letters
32
(
1
),
pp.
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
,
https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/2004GL021664
Cited by:
§7
.
L. Svalgaard (2020)
Prediction of Solar Cycle 25
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2010.02370
.
External Links:
Document
,
2010.02370
Cited by:
Table 1
,
§7
.
M. Talafha, M. Nagy, A. Lemerle, and K. Petrovay (2022)
Role of observable nonlinearities in solar cycle modulation
.
\aap
660
,
pp. A92
.
External Links:
Document
,
2112.14465
Cited by:
§11.2
.
M. H. Talafha, K. Petrovay, and A. Opitz (2025)
Effect of Nonlinear Surface Inflows into Activity Belts on Solar Cycle Modulation
.
\solphys
300
(
5
),
pp. 57
.
External Links:
Document
,
2504.03283
Cited by:
§11.2
.
M. H. Talafha (2025)
Modelling the Solar Cycle Nonlinearities into the Algebraic Approach
.
\solphys
300
(
11
),
pp. 157
.
External Links:
Document
,
2511.03611
Cited by:
§11.2
.
B. Tan (2019)
The characteristics of valley phase as predictor of the forthcoming solar cycle
.
Advances in Space Research
63
(
1
),
pp. 617–625
.
External Links:
Document
,
1808.01417
Cited by:
Table 1
.
M. Temmer (2021)
Space weather: the solar perspective
.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics
18
(
1
),
pp. 4
.
External Links:
Document
,
2104.04261
Cited by:
§1
.
K. Teweldebirhan, M. Miesch, and S. Gibson (2024)
Inflows Towards Bipolar Magnetic Active Regions and Their Nonlinear Impact on a Three-Dimensional Babcock–Leighton Solar Dynamo Model
.
\solphys
299
(
4
),
pp. 42
.
External Links:
Document
,
2310.00738
Cited by:
§11.2
.
L. A. Upton and D. H. Hathaway (2023)
Solar Cycle Precursors and the Outlook for Cycle 25
.
Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics)
128
(
10
),
pp. e2023JA031681
.
External Links:
Document
,
2305.06516
Cited by:
Table 1
.
L. A. Upton and D. H. Hathaway (2018a)
An Updated Solar Cycle 25 Prediction With AFT: The Modern Minimum
.
\grl
45
(
16
),
pp. 8091–8095
.
External Links:
Document
,
1808.04868
Cited by:
§5
.
L. A. Upton and D. H. Hathaway (2018b)
An Updated Solar Cycle 25 Prediction With AFT: The Modern Minimum
.
\grl
45
(
16
),
pp. 8091–8095
.
External Links:
Document
,
1808.04868
Cited by:
Table 1
,
§12
.
L. Upton and D. H. Hathaway (2014)
Effects of Meridional Flow Variations on Solar Cycles 23 and 24
.
\apj
792
(
2
),
pp. 142
.
External Links:
Document
,
1408.0035
Cited by:
§9
.
I. G. Usoskin (2017)
A history of solar activity over millennia
.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics
14
(
1
),
pp. 3
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
L. van Driel-Gesztelyi and L. M. Green (2015)
Evolution of Active Regions
.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics
12
(
1
),
pp. 1
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
V. Vashishth and B. B. Karak (2024)
The Role of Meridional Flow in the Generation of Solar/Stellar Magnetic Fields and Cycles
.
\apj
974
(
1
),
pp. 6
.
External Links:
Document
,
2407.16620
Cited by:
§3
,
§8
,
§9
.
V. M. Velasco Herrera, W. Soon, and D. R. Legates (2021)
Does Machine Learning reconstruct missing sunspots and forecast a new solar minimum?
.
Advances in Space Research
68
(
3
),
pp. 1485–1501
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
M. Waldmeier (1935)
Neue Eigenschaften der Sonnenfleckenkurve
.
Astronomische Mitteilungen der Eidgenössischen Sternwarte Zurich
14
,
pp. 105–136
.
Cited by:
§10.1
,
§10.2
.
Q. Wang, J. Li, and L. Guo (2021)
Solar cycle prediction using a long short-term memory deep learning model
.
Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics
21
(
1
),
pp. 012
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
R. Wang, J. Jiang, and Y. Luo (2025)
Solar Surface Magnetic Field Simulation from 2010 to 2024 and Anomalous Southern Poleward Flux Transport in Cycle 24
.
\apj
987
(
1
),
pp. 1
.
External Links:
Document
,
2506.01416
Cited by:
Figure 9
.
Y. -M. Wang, A. G. Nash, and Jr. Sheeley (1989a)
Magnetic Flux Transport on the Sun
.
Science
245
(
4919
),
pp. 712–718
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
,
§4.2
.
Y.-M. Wang, A. G. Nash, and N. R. Sheeley (1989b)
Evolution of the Sun’s Polar Fields during Sunspot Cycle 21: Poleward Surges and Long-Term Behavior
.
\apj
347
,
pp. 529
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
Y.-M. Wang, N. R. Sheeley, and A. G. Nash (1991)
A new solar cycle model including meridional circulation
.
\apj
383
,
pp. 431–442
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§4.2
.
Y.-M. Wang and N. R. Sheeley (1992)
On Potential Field Models of the Solar Corona
.
\apj
392
,
pp. 310
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§5
.
Y.-M. Wang and N. R. Sheeley (2009)
Understanding the Geomagnetic Precursor of the Solar Cycle
.
\apjl
694
,
pp. L11–L15
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3
.
Y.-M. Wang (2024)
The Radial Interplanetary Field Strength at Sunspot Minimum as Polar Field Proxy and Solar Cycle Predictor
.
\apjl
961
(
2
),
pp. L27
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
S. Wavhal, P. Kumar, and B. B. Karak (2025)
Analyses of Features of Magnetic Cycles at Different Amounts of Dynamo Supercriticality: Solar Dynamo Is About Two Times Critical
.
\solphys
300
(
2
),
pp. 21
.
External Links:
Document
,
2501.02262
Cited by:
Figure 15
,
§11.2
,
§12
,
§4.1
.
S. -S. Wu and G. Qin (2021)
Predicting Sunspot Numbers for Solar Cycles 25 and 26
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2102.06001
.
External Links:
Document
,
2102.06001
Cited by:
Table 1
.
Y. Xiong, J. Lu, K. Zhao, M. Sun, and Y. Gao (2021)
Forecasting solar cycle 25 using comprehensive precursor combination and multiple regression technique
.
\mnras
505
(
1
),
pp. 1046–1052
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
Q. Xu, R. Jain, and W. Xing (2024)
Data-Driven Forecasting of Sunspot Cycles: Pros and Cons of a Hybrid Approach
.
\solphys
299
(
2
),
pp. 25
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
Y. Yan, D. C. Stenning, V. L. Kashyap, and Y. Yu (2021)
Forecasting Solar Cycle 25 with a Principled Bayesian Two-stage Statistical Model
.
Research Notes of the American Astronomical Society
5
(
8
),
pp. 192
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
A. R. Yeates and A. Muñoz-Jaramillo (2013)
Kinematic active region formation in a three-dimensional solar dynamo model
.
\mnras
436
(
4
),
pp. 3366–3379
.
External Links:
Document
,
1309.6342
Cited by:
§4.2
.
A. R. Yeates, D. Nandy, and D. H. Mackay (2008)
Exploring the Physical Basis of Solar Cycle Predictions: Flux Transport Dynamics and Persistence of Memory in Advection- versus Diffusion-dominated Solar Convection Zones
.
\apj
673
,
pp. 544–556
.
External Links:
0709.1046
,
Document
Cited by:
§6
,
§8
,
§9
.
A. R. Yeates, L. Bertello, A. A. Pevtsov, and A. A. Pevtsov (2025)
Latitude Quenching Nonlinearity in the Solar Dynamo
.
\apj
978
(
2
),
pp. 147
.
External Links:
Document
,
2412.02312
Cited by:
§5
.
A. R. Yeates, M. C. M. Cheung, J. Jiang, K. Petrovay, and Y. Wang (2023)
Surface Flux Transport on the Sun
.
\ssr
219
(
4
),
pp. 31
.
External Links:
Document
,
2303.01209
Cited by:
§11.1
,
§5
.
A. Yoshida (2014)
Difference between even- and odd-numbered cycles in the predictability of solar activity and prediction of the amplitude of cycle 25
.
Annales Geophysicae
32
(
8
),
pp. 1035–1042
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
H. Zhu, H. Chen, W. Zhu, and M. He (2023)
Predicting Solar cycle 25 using an optimized long short-term memory model based on sunspot area data
.
Advances in Space Research
71
(
8
),
pp. 3521–3531
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
H. Zhu, W. Zhu, and M. He (2022)
Solar Cycle 25 Prediction Using an Optimized Long Short-Term Memory Mode with F10.7
.
\solphys
297
(
12
),
pp. 157
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Table 1
.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA