New Robust Streaming DMD with Forecasting
Report GitHub Issue
Г—
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
1.1
DMD - a review
1.1.1
Task
вҷҜ
вҖӢ
1
\sharp 1
: Approximate eigenpairs
1.1.2
Task
вҷҜ
вҖӢ
2
\sharp 2
: Modal analysis of the data and forecasting
1.2
DMD of large dimensional perpetual data streams
1.3
Organization of the paper and our contributions
2
Streaming DMD
2.1
Adding new data
2.1.1
Reorthogonalization
2.1.2
Low rank constraints
2.2
The compressed streaming DMD algorithm
3
Modifications of the compressed streaming DMD
3.1
Avoiding squared condition number
3.1.1
Theory behind the growth of
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
G
x
)
\kappa_{2}(G_{x})
3.1.2
Orthogonal factorization based updates
3.1.3
Using updated Cholesky factors
3.1.4
TQ based updates with enforced maximal ranks
3.1.5
Example - vorticity data from Example
2.1
3.2
Streaming DMD with Exact DMD vectors
3.2.1
KMD with the Exact DMD vectors
3.3
Discussion and need for further improvements
4
One basis low-rank sDMD
4.1
Low rank snapshots вҖ“ change of basis
4.1.1
TQ decomposition
4.2
The Exact DMD vectors and the residuals
4.3
Updating
4.4
KMD and forecasting
4.4.1
Example: Lifted hydrogen jet flame (BLAST dataset)
4.4.2
Example: Gray-Scott model
5
Online DMD for long low dimensional trajectory (
m
вүӘ
n
m\ll n
)
5.1
Sherman-Morrison updates of
G
^
x
вҲ’
1
\widehat{G}_{x}^{-1}
5.1.1
Extension to HWR-sDMD (
m
>
n
m>n
)
5.2
Updating Cholesky factor of
G
^
x
\widehat{G}_{x}
5.3
Updating TQ decomposition
5.3.1
Example: ChuaвҖҷs circuit
6
Concluding remarks and outlook
7
Appendix
7.1
Generalization of Sherman-Morrison updates
7.2
Initialization
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2604.02928v1 [math.NA] 03 Apr 2026
\sidecaptionvpos
figuret
New Robust Streaming DMD with Forecasting
Zlatko DrmaДҚ
Department of Mathematics
Faculty of Science
University of Zagreb
drmac@math.hr
&Ela Дҗimoti
Department of Mathematics
Faculty of Science
University of Zagreb
ela.dimoti@math.hr
Abstract
The Dynamic Mode Decomposition (DMD) and the more general Extended DMD (EDMD) are powerful tools for computational analysis of dynamical systems in data-driven scenarios. They are built on the theoretical foundation of the Koopman composition operator and can be considered as numerical methods for data snapshot-based extraction of spectral information of the composition operator associated with the dynamics, spectral analysis of the structure of the dynamics, and for forecasting.
In high fidelity numerical simulations, the state space is high dimensional and efficient numerical methods leverage the fact that the actual dynamics evolves on manifolds of much smaller dimension. This motivates computing low rank approximations in a streaming fashion and the DMD matrix is adaptively updated with newly received data. In this way, large number of high dimensional snapshots can be processed very efficiently. Low dimensional representation also requires fast updating for online applications.
This paper revisits the pioneering works of Hemati, Williams and Rowley (Physics of Fluids, 2014), and Zhang, Rowley, Deem and Cattafesta (SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems, 2019) on the streaming DMD and proposes
improvements in functionality (using residual bounds, Exact DMD vectors), computational efficiency (more efficient algorithm with smaller memory footprint) and numerical robustness (smaller condition numbers and better forecasting skill).
1
Introduction
Dynamic Mode Decomposition (DMD) is a simple, yet powerful and versatile, data-driven tool for analyzing complex nonlinear dynamical systems. It was originally introduced in the context of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) by Schmid and Sesterhenn in their seminal works
Schmid and Sesterhenn (
2008
); Schmid (
2010
)
.
It can be used to identify, analyze and forecast/control the dynamics
рқҗұ
i
+
1
=
T
вҖӢ
(
рқҗұ
i
)
\mathbf{x}_{i+1}=T(\mathbf{x}_{i})
, governed by a mapping
T
:
в„қ
m
вҹ¶
в„қ
m
T:\mathbb{R}^{m}\longrightarrow\mathbb{R}^{m}
that may not be known, but an abundance of data snapshots can be generated.
CFD applications motivated further theoretical and algorithmic development and extensions of the method, see
Rowley
et al.
(
2009
)
,
Schmid
et al.
(
2011
)
,
Schmid (
2011
)
,
Schmid (
2021
)
,
MeziДҮ (
2013
)
,
Tu
et al.
(
2014
)
,
Williams
et al.
(
2015
)
,
Schmid (
2022
)
,
JovanoviДҮ
et al.
(
2012
)
,
JovanoviДҮ
et al.
(
2014
)
,
Giannakis and Das (
2020
)
.
The key feature of the DMD is that it is entirely data driven and that the core algorithm is oblivious to the nature of the data. This makes it a multi-purpose tool with a wide palette of applications, including robotics, aeroacoustics, video processing, machine learning, and non-intrusive model reduction. For an introduction to DMD and its applications, the reader is referred to
Kutz
et al.
(
2016
)
,
Akshay
et al.
(
2021
)
,
Brunton
et al.
(
2022
)
.
In a pure data-driven scenario, the data snapshots are acquired by sophisticated high tech measurements, such as e.g. the Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV)
Chaugule
et al.
(
2023
)
, using fast-response pressure sensitive paint (PSP) for measuring acoustic pressure field
Ali
et al.
(
2016
)
, or collecting detailed vehicle trajectory data through a network of synchronized digital video cameras and customized software application that transcribes the vehicle trajectory data from the video
U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration (
2016
)
,
Avila and MeziДҮ (
2020
)
. In another setting, the model is known and high-fidelity numerical simulations are available and are used to study the structure of the dynamics, motivate theoretical development or e.g. to train a reduced order model. In the physics informed DMD, a priori known information on the structure of the underlying operator can be
built in the algorithm
Baddoo
et al.
(
2023
)
.
To set the stage and for the readerвҖҷs convenience, in В§
1.1
we first review the key elements of Dynamic Mode Decomposition (DMD). Then, in В§
1.2
, we define the specific problem addressed in this paperвҖ”adapting DMD to perpetual streams of incoming data snapshots. This introduction concludes with В§
1.3
, where we list our contributions to the streaming DMD.
1.1
DMD - a review
Typically, the mathematical model is expressed as an autonomous system of ordinary differential equations
x
Лҷ
вҖӢ
(
t
)
=
F
вҖӢ
(
x
вҖӢ
(
t
)
)
\dot{x}(t)=F(x(t))
, and in numerical simulations it is replaced by a discrete system
x
i
+
1
=
T
вҖӢ
(
x
i
)
x_{i+1}=T(x_{i})
. In other applications, due to the nature of the data, the model is discrete, such as modeling the spread of infectious diseases in order to forecast potential outbreaks
MeziДҮ
et al.
(
2024
)
.
Suppose that we have gathered data in the form
(
f
вҖӢ
(
рқҗұ
i
)
,
f
вҖӢ
(
T
вҖӢ
(
рқҗұ
i
)
)
)
(f(\mathbf{x}_{i}),f(T(\mathbf{x}_{i})))
,
i
=
1
,
2
,
вҖҰ
i=1,2,\ldots
, where
f
f
is some observable of interest вҖ“ a scalar or vector-valued function of the states. The observable
f
f
can be simply the full state,
f
вҖӢ
(
рқҗұ
)
=
рқҗұ
f(\mathbf{x})=\mathbf{x}
and the data is
(
рқҗұ
i
,
рқҗІ
i
=
T
вҖӢ
(
рқҗұ
i
)
)
(\mathbf{x}_{i},\mathbf{y}_{i}=T(\mathbf{x}_{i}))
. The data may originate from a single long trajectory, or from several trajectories of different lengths, obtained by a sequence of numerical simulations or measurements of the system, using different initial conditions. If
n
n
data pairs are available, they will be arranged in two
m
Г—
n
m\times n
matrices
X
X
and
Y
Y
such that
Y
вҖӢ
(
:
,
i
)
=
f
вҖӢ
(
T
вҖӢ
(
X
вҖӢ
(
:
,
i
)
)
)
=
(
f
вҲҳ
T
)
вҖӢ
(
X
вҖӢ
(
:
,
i
)
)
,
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
n
.
Y(:,i)=f(T(X(:,i)))=(f\circ T)(X(:,i)),\;\;\;i=1,\ldots,n.
(1)
Relation (
1
) defines the (Koopman) composition operator
рқ’Ұ
вҖӢ
f
=
f
вҲҳ
T
\mathcal{K}f=f\circ T
on the suitable space of observables, and this connection provides theoretical underpinnings for the DMD.
For more details we refer the reader to
MeziДҮ (
2005
)
,
MeziДҮ (
2020
)
.
To simplify the notation, we will use
рқҗұ
i
=
X
вҖӢ
(
:
,
i
)
\mathbf{x}_{i}=X(:,i)
,
рқҗІ
i
=
Y
вҖӢ
(
:
,
i
)
\mathbf{y}_{i}=Y(:,i)
.
We will be mainly interested in the case
m
>
n
m>n
, possibly
m
вү«
n
m\gg n
, that is, both
X
X
and
Y
Y
are tall and skinny matrices. The assumption is that
X
X
and
Y
Y
are related by a linear transformation
A
A
such that
Y
вүҲ
A
вҖӢ
X
Y\approx AX
.
This relation is in practical computation accomplished in the least squares sense, that is,
A
вҲҲ
argmin
A
вҖӢ
вҖ–
A
вҖӢ
X
вҲ’
Y
вҖ–
F
A\in\mathrm{argmin}_{A}\|AX-Y\|_{F}
.
It should be noted that in this setting (
m
>
n
m>n
) the least squares problem is under-determined and the solution set is a linear manifold. Namely, if
X
вҹӮ
X_{\perp}
is such that
X
вҹӮ
T
вҖӢ
X
=
0
X_{\perp}^{T}X=0
, then
(
A
+
E
вҖӢ
X
вҹӮ
T
)
вҖӢ
X
=
A
вҖӢ
X
(A+EX_{\perp}^{T})X=AX
for any
E
E
of compatible dimensions. The particular choice
A
=
Y
вҖӢ
X
вҖ 
A=YX^{\dagger}
has the unique property of having the smallest Frobenius norm among all solutions. However, for any choice of
A
A
from the solution manifold, the product
A
вҖӢ
X
=
Y
вҖӢ
P
в„ӣ
вҖӢ
(
X
T
)
AX=YP_{\mathcal{R}(X^{T})}
is determined uniquely.
(If
rank
вҖӢ
(
X
)
=
n
\mathrm{rank}(X)=n
, then
A
вҖӢ
X
=
Y
AX=Y
.)
1.1.1
Task
вҷҜ
вҖӢ
1
\sharp 1
: Approximate eigenpairs
The first task in DMD is to compute the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of
A
A
. When doing that,
one has to take into account the following constraints:
(1) Whatever the choice of
A
A
, the provided data define only how
A
A
acts in the range of
X
X
:
A
вҖӢ
X
вҖӢ
w
=
Y
вҖӢ
P
в„ӣ
вҖӢ
(
X
T
)
вҖӢ
w
AXw=YP_{\mathcal{R}(X^{T})}w
,
w
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
w\in\mathbb{R}^{n}
.
(2) The range of
X
X
is not necessarily
A
A
вҖ“invariant, so the computed eigenvalues and eigenvectors of
A
A
are only approximations, with possibly unacceptably large residuals.
To identify an approximate eigenpair
(
О»
,
X
вҖӢ
w
)
(\lambda,Xw)
in this setting, the residual
r
=
A
вҖӢ
X
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
О»
вҖӢ
X
вҖӢ
w
r=AXw-\lambda Xw
should be small with some judicious choice of
w
w
and
О»
\lambda
. One way of minimizing the residual
r
r
is to annihilate its component in the range of
X
X
, so that what it remains is in the orthogonal complement:
X
T
вҖӢ
r
=
0
X^{T}r=0
. In other words,
X
T
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
X
вҖӢ
w
=
О»
вҖӢ
X
T
вҖӢ
X
вҖӢ
w
.
(
X
T
вҖӢ
Y
вҖӢ
P
в„ӣ
вҖӢ
(
X
T
)
вҖӢ
w
=
О»
вҖӢ
X
T
вҖӢ
X
вҖӢ
w
)
X^{T}AXw=\lambda X^{T}Xw.\;\;(X^{T}YP_{\mathcal{R}(X^{T})}w=\lambda X^{T}Xw)
(2)
This is an
n
Г—
n
n\times n
generalized eigenvalue problem, where
X
T
вҖӢ
X
X^{T}X
is possibly singular (if
X
X
is rank deficient) or highly illвҖ“conditioned (numerically singular). In addition,
X
X
, as well as
Y
Y
, may be contaminated by noise. To tackle the (numerical) rank of
X
X
,
let
rank
вҖӢ
(
X
)
=
r
X
\mathrm{rank}(X)=r_{X}
, and let
X
=
U
вҖӢ
ОЈ
вҖӢ
V
T
X=U\Sigma V^{T}
be the economyвҖ“size SVD of
X
X
, with
r
X
Г—
r
X
r_{X}\times r_{X}
matrix
ОЈ
\Sigma
of strictly positive singular values
Пғ
1
вүҘ
вӢҜ
вүҘ
Пғ
r
X
>
0
\sigma_{1}\geq\cdots\geq\sigma_{r_{X}}>0
. Note that
X
T
=
V
вҖӢ
ОЈ
вҖӢ
U
T
X^{T}=V\Sigma U^{T}
, and that
P
в„ӣ
вҖӢ
(
X
T
)
=
V
вҖӢ
V
T
P_{\mathcal{R}(X^{T})}=VV^{T}
. This means that
A
вҖӢ
X
=
Y
вҖӢ
P
в„ӣ
вҖӢ
(
X
T
)
вҹә
A
вҖӢ
U
вҖӢ
ОЈ
вҖӢ
V
T
=
Y
вҖӢ
V
вҖӢ
V
T
,
AX=YP_{\mathcal{R}(X^{T})}\Longleftrightarrow AU\Sigma V^{T}=YVV^{T},
(3)
i.e.
A
вҖӢ
U
вҖӢ
ОЈ
=
Y
вҖӢ
V
AU\Sigma=YV
.
Since the columns of
U
U
are an orthonormal basis for the range of
X
X
, the RayleighвҖ“Ritz method can be applied using
U
U
which, instead of (
2
), yields the eigenvalue problem
U
T
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
U
вҖӢ
w
=
О»
вҖӢ
w
,
where
вҖӢ
U
T
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
U
=
U
T
вҖӢ
Y
вҖӢ
V
вҖӢ
ОЈ
вҲ’
1
.
U^{T}AUw=\lambda w,\;\;\mbox{where}\;\;U^{T}AU=U^{T}YV\Sigma^{-1}.
(4)
Each eigenpair
(
О»
,
w
)
(\lambda,w)
gives an approximation, the Ritz pair
(
О»
,
U
вҖӢ
w
)
(\lambda,Uw)
. This is the essence of the
DMD method вҖ“ it is a data-driven RayleighвҖ“Ritz spectral extraction
from the range of
X
X
. In practical computation, the smallest singular values of
X
X
will be computed with large relative errors. A numerically prudent course of action is to use truncated SVD, i.e. to carefully set a tolerance threshold
tol
and instead of
r
X
r_{X}
use the
k
k
-truncated SVD, where
k
=
max
вҒЎ
{
i
:
Пғ
i
>
tol
вҖӢ
Пғ
1
}
k=\max\{i:\sigma_{i}>\texttt{tol}\,\sigma_{1}\}
(5)
denotes the numerical rank. Using truncated SVD can be interpreted as replacing
X
X
with
X
+
О”
вҖӢ
X
=
U
k
вҖӢ
ОЈ
k
вҖӢ
V
k
T
X+\Delta X=U_{k}\Sigma_{k}V_{k}^{T}
, where
U
k
=
U
(
:
,
1
:
k
)
U_{k}=U(:,1:k)
,
V
k
=
V
(
:
,
1
:
k
)
V_{k}=V(:,1:k)
,
ОЈ
k
=
ОЈ
(
1
:
k
,
1
:
k
)
\Sigma_{k}=\Sigma(1:k,1:k)
, and
1
1
1
Here
вҖ–
X
вҖ–
2
=
Пғ
1
\|X\|_{2}=\sigma_{1}
is the matrix spectral norm.
вҖ–
О”
вҖӢ
X
вҖ–
2
вүӨ
tol
вҖӢ
вҖ–
X
вҖ–
2
\|\Delta X\|_{2}\leq\texttt{tol}\|X\|_{2}
.
In fact, computation of the SVD in floating-point arithmetic already introduces backward error
Оҙ
вҖӢ
X
\delta X
which
obeys an upper bound similar as
О”
вҖӢ
X
\Delta X
.
For a detailed discussion on this topic see
DrmaДҚ
et al.
(
2018
)
,
DrmaДҚ (
2024
)
.
Hence, in practical computation, the formula (
4
) is used with
U
вҶҗ
U
k
U\leftarrow U_{k}
,
V
вҶҗ
V
k
V\leftarrow V_{k}
,
ОЈ
вҶҗ
ОЈ
k
\Sigma\leftarrow\Sigma_{k}
.
For each Ritz pair
(
О»
i
,
рқҗі
i
=
U
вҖӢ
w
i
)
(\lambda_{i},\mathbf{z}_{i}=Uw_{i})
,
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
k
i=1,\ldots,k
, the residual
r
i
=
A
вҖӢ
U
вҖӢ
w
i
вҲ’
О»
вҖӢ
U
вҖӢ
w
i
r_{i}=AUw_{i}-\lambda Uw_{i}
is in general not zero. An important addition to the DMD, introduced in
DrmaДҚ
et al.
(
2018
)
, is computation of the residuals within the DMD scheme: It suffices to note that
r
i
=
A
вҖӢ
рқҗі
i
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
рқҗі
i
=
A
вҖӢ
U
вҖӢ
w
i
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
U
вҖӢ
w
i
=
Y
вҖӢ
V
вҖӢ
ОЈ
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
w
i
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
U
вҖӢ
w
i
.
r_{i}=A\mathbf{z}_{i}-\lambda_{i}\mathbf{z}_{i}=AUw_{i}-\lambda_{i}Uw_{i}=YV\Sigma^{-1}w_{i}-\lambda_{i}Uw_{i}.
(6)
Then, all norms
вҖ–
r
i
вҖ–
2
\|r_{i}\|_{2}
can be computed and Ritz pairs can be ordered starting with the best ones, i.e. those with smallest residuals.
For identifying coherent states, the best candidates are (at this point at least intuitively) the Ritz pairs with smallest residuals.
This is an important part of the DMD algorithm that is, unfortunately, missing in most of the literature and software solutions. An implementation that includes the residuals has recently been included in the LAPACK library
DrmaДҚ (
2024
)
.
Algorithm
1
summarizes the preceding discussion.
Algorithm 1
(
Z
k
,
Оӣ
k
,
r
k
,
[
B
k
]
,
[
Z
k
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
]
)
=
DMD
вҖӢ
(
X
,
Y
;
tol
)
(Z_{k},\Lambda_{k},r_{k},[B_{k}],[Z_{k}^{(ex)}])=\mathrm{DMD}(X,Y;\texttt{tol})
0:
X
=
(
рқҗұ
1
,
вҖҰ
,
рқҗұ
n
)
,
Y
=
(
рқҗІ
1
,
вҖҰ
,
рқҗІ
n
)
вҲҲ
в„қ
m
Г—
n
X=(\mathbf{x}_{1},\ldots,\mathbf{x}_{n}),Y=(\mathbf{y}_{1},\ldots,\mathbf{y}_{n})\in{\mathbb{R}}^{m\times n}
that define a sequence of snapshots
pairs
(
x
i
,
y
i
)
(x_{i},y_{i})
. (Tacit assumption is that
m
m
is large and that
n
вүӘ
m
n\ll m
.)
Tolerance
tol
for the truncation (
5
).
1:
[
U
,
ОЈ
,
V
]
=
svd
вҖӢ
(
X
,
"econ"
)
[U,\Sigma,V]=\mathrm{svd}(X,\text{"econ"})
; {
X
=
U
вҖӢ
ОЈ
вҖӢ
V
T
X=U\Sigma V^{T}
,
U
вҲҲ
в„қ
m
Г—
n
U\in{\mathbb{R}}^{m\times n}
,
V
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
Г—
n
V\in{\mathbb{R}}^{n\times n}
,
ОЈ
=
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
g
вҖӢ
(
Пғ
i
)
i
=
1
n
\Sigma={diag}(\sigma_{i})_{i=1}^{n}
.
}
2:
Determine numerical rank
k
k
, using (
5
) with the threshold
tol
.
3:
U
k
=
U
(
:
,
1
:
k
)
U_{k}=U(:,1:k)
,
V
k
=
V
(
:
,
1
:
k
)
V_{k}=V(:,1:k)
,
ОЈ
k
=
ОЈ
(
1
:
k
,
1
:
k
)
\Sigma_{k}=\Sigma(1:k,1:k)
;
4:
B
k
=
Y
вҖӢ
(
V
k
вҖӢ
ОЈ
k
вҲ’
1
)
{B}_{k}=Y(V_{k}\Sigma_{k}^{-1})
; {
Data driven formula for
A
вҖӢ
U
k
AU_{k}
[optional output].
}
5:
S
k
=
U
k
вҲ—
вҖӢ
B
k
S_{k}=U_{k}^{*}B_{k}
; {
S
k
=
U
k
вҲ—
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
U
k
S_{k}=U_{k}^{*}AU_{k}
is the Rayleigh quotient.
}
6:
[
W
k
,
Оӣ
k
]
=
eig
вҖӢ
(
S
k
)
[W_{k},\Lambda_{k}]=\mathrm{eig}(S_{k})
; {
Оӣ
k
=
diag
вҖӢ
(
О»
i
)
i
=
1
k
\Lambda_{k}=\mathrm{diag}(\lambda_{i})_{i=1}^{k}
;
S
k
вҖӢ
W
k
вҖӢ
(
:
,
i
)
=
О»
i
вҖӢ
W
k
вҖӢ
(
:
,
i
)
S_{k}W_{k}(:,i)=\lambda_{i}W_{k}(:,i)
.}
7:
Z
k
=
U
k
вҖӢ
W
k
Z_{k}=U_{k}W_{k}
;
8:
Z
k
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
=
B
k
вҖӢ
W
k
Z_{k}^{(ex)}=B_{k}W_{k}
; {
The (unscaled) Exact DMD vectors [optional output].
}
9:
r
k
вҖӢ
(
i
)
=
вҖ–
B
k
вҖӢ
W
k
вҖӢ
(
:
,
i
)
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
Z
k
вҖӢ
(
:
,
i
)
вҖ–
2
r_{k}(i)=\|B_{k}W_{k}(:,i)-\lambda_{i}Z_{k}(:,i)\|_{2}
,
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
k
i=1,\ldots,k
; {
The residuals (
6
).
}
9:
Z
k
Z_{k}
,
Оӣ
k
\Lambda_{k}
,
r
k
r_{k}
,
[
B
k
]
[B_{k}]
,
[
Z
k
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
]
[Z_{k}^{(ex)}]
.
It should be noted that the matrix
Y
вҖӢ
X
вҖ 
YX^{\dagger}
is never used in this procedure. For the definition and properties of the
Exact DMD vectors (Line 8 in Algorithm
1
) see
Tu
et al.
(
2014
)
and
DrmaДҚ (
2024
)
.
1.1.2
Task
вҷҜ
вҖӢ
2
\sharp 2
: Modal analysis of the data and forecasting
After identifying approximate eigenpairs, the second task is to analyze the data (modal decomposition) and develop forecasting skill. For a selection of
в„“
вүӨ
k
\ell\leq k
Ritz pairs
(
О»
ПӮ
j
,
рқҗі
ПӮ
j
)
(\lambda_{\varsigma_{j}},\mathbf{z}_{\varsigma_{j}})
,
j
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
в„“
j=1,\ldots,\ell
, the
task is to find coefficients
Оұ
1
,
вҖҰ
,
Оұ
в„“
\alpha_{1},\ldots,\alpha_{\ell}
that minimize the loss function
L
вҖӢ
(
Оұ
1
,
вҖҰ
,
Оұ
в„“
)
=
вҲ‘
i
=
1
n
+
1
w
i
2
вҖӢ
вҖ–
рқҗұ
i
вҲ’
вҲ‘
j
=
1
в„“
рқҗі
ПӮ
j
вҖӢ
Оұ
j
вҖӢ
О»
ПӮ
j
i
вҲ’
1
вҖ–
2
2
вҹ¶
min
Оұ
j
вҒЎ
(
рқҗұ
i
вүҲ
вҲ‘
j
=
1
в„“
рқҗі
ПӮ
j
вҖӢ
Оұ
j
вҖӢ
О»
ПӮ
j
i
вҲ’
1
)
,
L(\alpha_{1},\ldots,\alpha_{\ell})=\sum_{i=1}^{n+1}w_{i}^{2}\|\mathbf{x}_{i}-\sum_{j=1}^{\ell}\mathbf{z}_{\varsigma_{j}}\alpha_{j}\lambda_{\varsigma_{j}}^{i-1}\|_{2}^{2}\longrightarrow\min_{\alpha_{j}}\;\;\;(\mathbf{x}_{i}\approx\sum_{j=1}^{\ell}\mathbf{z}_{\varsigma_{j}}\alpha_{j}\lambda_{\varsigma_{j}}^{i-1}),
(7)
where
w
i
вүҘ
0
w_{i}\geq 0
is a weight that determines the importance of the
i
i
-th snapshot.
The structure of the dynamics is better revealed and understood if a faithful representation (
7
), called the Koopman Mode Decomposition (KMD),
can be achieved with small
в„“
\ell
.
Then, for instance, if
рқҗұ
n
+
1
=
рқҗІ
n
вүҲ
вҲ‘
j
=
1
в„“
рқҗі
ПӮ
j
вҖӢ
Оұ
j
вҖӢ
О»
ПӮ
j
n
\mathbf{x}_{n+1}=\mathbf{y}_{n}\approx\sum_{j=1}^{\ell}\mathbf{z}_{\varsigma_{j}}\alpha_{j}\lambda_{\varsigma_{j}}^{n}
,
a reasonable forecast for
рқҗІ
n
+
k
\mathbf{y}_{n+k}
is
A
k
вҖӢ
рқҗІ
n
вүҲ
вҲ‘
j
=
1
в„“
рқҗі
ПӮ
j
вҖӢ
Оұ
j
вҖӢ
О»
ПӮ
j
n
+
k
A^{k}\mathbf{y}_{n}\approx\sum_{j=1}^{\ell}\mathbf{z}_{\varsigma_{j}}\alpha_{j}\lambda_{\varsigma_{j}}^{n+k}
,
k
=
1
,
2
,
вҖҰ
k=1,2,\ldots
. For this application of (
7
) the weights
w
i
w_{i}
should favor the most recent data snapshots.
The selection of a small number of modes that capture data snapshots can be achieved by imposing a sparsity constraint to minimization (
7
). This is accomplished in the Sparsity Promoting DMD
JovanoviДҮ
et al.
(
2014
)
, where the selection of the modes is delegated to a black-boxed sparsity-constrained optimization software. An alternative is to select modes that have small residuals as shown in
Colbrook
et al.
(
2025
)
.
For detailed discussion and another approach, see
Sayadi
et al.
(
2015
)
.
1.2
DMD of large dimensional perpetual data streams
In numerical simulations with large
m
m
, memory footprint and computational complexity make the DMD analysis expensive. If
m
m
is, say, in millions then accommodating many snapshots in fast memory is unfeasible, and out-of-core and low rank approximation techniques may be necessary.
This becomes even more challenging task in an online (streaming) application of the DMD, when the new data are delivered one snapshot or a block of snapshots at a time.
Hence, in streaming scenarios, the DMD/KMD analysis (optionally with forecasting) is performed continuously in a window of dynamically expanding width.
The applications include onboard ocean and acoustic forecasting of temparature, salinity, velocity and transmission loss fields on unmanned autonomous ocean platforms
Ryu
et al.
(
2022
)
, model predictive control of fluid flow
Li and Deng (
2024
)
or e.g. the UAVвҖҷs
Guevara
et al.
(
2023
)
, construction of reduced order model in flow simulations
Suh
et al.
(
2023
)
,
Huhn
et al.
(
2023
)
, control of wind farms
Liew
et al.
(
2022
)
, or e.g. real-time motion detection
Mignacca
et al.
(
2025
)
.
Clearly, computing a new DMD from scratch after adding one more snapshots is not optimal and it may not be feasible in some real-time applications. This problem was first addressed by Hemati, Williams and Rowley
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
, who proposed low rank approximations of the data, based on a rank revealing decomposition of data matrices. Such an approach is most effective in cases of dynamics described in large state space dimension
m
m
, but evolving on low dimensional manifolds. Zhang, Rowley, Deem and Cattafesta
Zhang
et al.
(
2019
)
developed this further and described fast updating scheme for the case of large number of low dimensional data snapshots (such that
X
X
is of full row rank).
The key idea of this approach is to use the Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury formula that is used for fast update of the pseudoinverse
X
вҖ 
=
X
T
вҖӢ
(
X
вҖӢ
X
T
)
вҲ’
1
X^{\dagger}=X^{T}(XX^{T})^{-1}
.
Some approaches to the streaming DMD use techniques for updating the SVD of
X
X
, see
Matsumoto and Indinger (
2017
)
,
Nedzhibov (
2023
)
. Since our main interest are the cases of large dimensional data, the SVD based updating is less attractive and we focus on
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
,
Zhang
et al.
(
2019
)
.
1.3
Organization of the paper and our contributions
The streaming DMD from
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
is reviewed in В§
2
, with detailed discussions of some subtle numerical details. In В§
3
, we first point out that the condition number that determines the numerical accuracy of the methods in
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
,
Zhang
et al.
(
2019
)
is
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
X
вҖӢ
X
T
)
=
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
X
)
2
\kappa_{2}(XX^{T})=\kappa_{2}(X)^{2}
.
Then, in В§
3.1
, we present two major modifications of the streaming DMD:
(i)
To avoid squaring the condition number when updating
X
вҖ 
X^{\dagger}
, we introduce new methods based on
fast updates of certain orthogonal factorization of
X
X
(В§
3.1.2
) and on updated Cholesky factor of
X
вҖӢ
X
T
XX^{T}
(В§
3.1.3
). Similarly as in
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
, we can enforce maximal rank (В§
3.1.4
).
Numerical example in В§
3.1.5
illustrates the superiority of the new approach.
(ii)
It is shown how to compute the Exact DMD vectors (В§
3.2
) and use them for efficient KMD in the framework of
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
. This section concludes with a discussion (В§
3.3
) that motivates further improvements.
The second part of this work (В§
4
) presents a new streaming DMD algorithm based on
DrmaДҚ
et al.
(
2018
)
,
DrmaДҚ (
2024
)
. Its main difference from
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
is that it uses a single orthonormal basis for both
X
X
and
Y
Y
(В§
4.1
). However, it has the same functionalities, including residual bounds and using the Exact DMD vectors (В§
4.2
).
The updating, outlined in В§
4.3
,
is based on orthogonal decomposition from В§
3.1.2
. The superior numerical robustness of the method is illustrated in В§
4.4
using the problem of forecasting.
In addition to this enhanced robustness, the one-basis approach reduces memory footprint and the
flop
count, and allows for more efficient KMD, selection of Ritz pairs with small residuals, and efficient application of other variations of the DMD (sparsity promoting DMD
JovanoviДҮ
et al.
(
2014
)
, forward-backward DMD
Dawson
et al.
(
2016
)
, Optimal DMD
Wynn
et al.
(
2013
)
, Koopman-Schur DMD
DrmaДҚ and MeziДҮ (
2024
)
). Section
5
reviews the updating strategy of
Zhang
et al.
(
2019
)
, and В§
5.1.1
provides explicit formulas for using
Zhang
et al.
(
2019
)
in the reduced low rank computation in
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
. Then, we propose two alternatives to the numerically sensitive Sherman-Morrison updating of the inverse of
X
вҖӢ
X
T
XX^{T}
: implicit updating of the Cholesky factor in В§
5.2
and using the TQ factorization in В§
5.3
. Numerical examples
confirm theoretical predictions that the new proposed approaches in numerical accuracy outperform existing methods. Final remarks and plans for further development are given in В§
6
.
2
Streaming DMD
The key idea of
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
is to keep
X
X
and
Y
Y
in factored rankвҖ“revealing factorizations
X
=
Q
x
вҖӢ
X
~
,
Y
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
,
X=Q_{x}\widetilde{X},\;\;Y=Q_{y}\widetilde{Y},
(8)
where
Q
x
вҲҲ
в„қ
m
Г—
r
x
Q_{x}\in\mathbb{R}^{m\times r_{x}}
,
Q
y
вҲҲ
в„қ
m
Г—
r
y
Q_{y}\in\mathbb{R}^{m\times r_{y}}
are orthonormal, and
X
~
вҲҲ
в„қ
r
x
Г—
n
\widetilde{X}\in\mathbb{R}^{r_{x}\times n}
,
Y
~
вҲҲ
в„қ
r
y
Г—
n
\widetilde{Y}\in\mathbb{R}^{r_{y}\times n}
are full row rank matrices with
r
x
=
rank
вҖӢ
(
X
)
r_{x}=\mathrm{rank}(X)
,
r
y
=
rank
вҖӢ
(
Y
)
r_{y}=\mathrm{rank}(Y)
. Using this notation, (
3
) becomes
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
X
~
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
P
в„ӣ
вҖӢ
(
X
T
)
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
вҖӢ
X
~
T
вҒЈ
вҖ 
,
AQ_{x}\widetilde{X}=Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}P_{\mathcal{R}(X^{T})}=Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{T}\widetilde{X}^{T\dagger},
(9)
where we have used that the orthogonal projector onto the range of
X
T
X^{T}
equals
P
в„ӣ
вҖӢ
(
X
T
)
=
X
~
T
вҖӢ
X
~
T
вҒЈ
вҖ 
P_{\mathcal{R}(X^{T})}=\widetilde{X}^{T}\widetilde{X}^{T\dagger}
. Multiplying equation (
9
) from the right with
X
~
T
\widetilde{X}^{T}
yields
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
,
i.e.
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
вҖӢ
(
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
)
вҲ’
1
.
AQ_{x}\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T}=Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{T},\;\;\mbox{i.e.}\;\;AQ_{x}=Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{T}(\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T})^{-1}.
(10)
The Rayleigh quotient reads, instead of (
4
),
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
=
(
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
Q
y
)
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
)
вҖӢ
(
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
)
вҲ’
1
.
Q_{x}^{T}AQ_{x}=(Q_{x}^{T}Q_{y})(\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{T})(\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T})^{-1}.
(11)
The Ritz vectors are obtained by lifting the eigenvectors
w
i
w_{i}
of
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
Q_{x}^{T}AQ_{x}
by
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
Q_{x}w_{i}
.
To assimilate the new data
(
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
,
рқҗІ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
(\mathbf{x}_{new},\mathbf{y}_{new})
,
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
first updates the factorizations (
8
), and then the ingredients in the first formula in (
11
). Note that the dimensions of all three factors are determined by the ranks
r
x
r_{x}
,
r
y
r_{y}
and the other two dimensions
m
m
,
n
n
are inner dimensions in the cross products.
The key variables in the algorithm, in addition to the bases
Q
x
Q_{x}
,
Q
y
Q_{y}
are the following cross-products
Q
x
,
y
=
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
Q
y
,
G
y
,
x
=
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
,
G
x
=
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
,
G
y
=
Y
~
вҖӢ
Y
~
T
.
Q_{x,y}=Q_{x}^{T}Q_{y},\;\;G_{y,x}=\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{T},\;\;G_{x}=\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T},\;\;G_{y}=\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{Y}^{T}.
(12)
2.1
Adding new data
Suppose a new data pair
(
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
,
рқҗІ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
(\mathbf{x}_{new},\mathbf{y}_{new})
becomes available. The goal is to update the factorizations (
8
) and the Rayleigh quotient (
11
). Consider
X
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
X_{new}
. The standard procedure for the Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization is as follows:
X
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\displaystyle\!\!\!X_{new}
=
\displaystyle=
(
Q
x
вҖӢ
X
~
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
=
(
Q
x
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
Q
x
вҖӢ
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
вҖӢ
(
X
~
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
0
1
)
\displaystyle\begin{pmatrix}Q_{x}\widetilde{X}&\mathbf{x}_{new}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}Q_{x}&\mathbf{x}_{new}-Q_{x}Q_{x}^{T}\mathbf{x}_{new}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{X}&Q_{x}^{T}\mathbf{x}_{new}\cr 0&1\end{pmatrix}
(13)
=
\displaystyle=
(
Q
x
q
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
вҖӢ
(
X
~
g
x
0
Оі
x
)
=
Q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
,
g
x
=
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
,
Оі
x
=
вҖ–
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
Q
x
вҖӢ
g
x
вҖ–
2
,
\displaystyle\begin{pmatrix}Q_{x}&q_{new}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{X}&g_{x}\cr 0&\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix}=Q_{x,new}\widetilde{X}_{new},\;\;\;g_{x}=Q_{x}^{T}\mathbf{x}_{new},\;\;\gamma_{x}=\|\mathbf{x}_{new}-Q_{x}g_{x}\|_{2},
where the construction of the new basis vector
q
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
q_{new}
depends on
Оі
x
\gamma_{x}
as follows:
(1)
Оі
x
вү 
0
\gamma_{x}\neq 0
. In this case
q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
Q
x
вҖӢ
g
x
)
/
Оі
x
q_{x,new}=(\mathbf{x}_{new}-Q_{x}g_{x})/\gamma_{x}
, and
Q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
Q
x
q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
,
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
X
~
g
x
0
Оі
x
)
;
Q_{x,new}=\begin{pmatrix}Q_{x}&q_{x,new}\end{pmatrix},\;\;\;\widetilde{X}_{new}=\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{X}&g_{x}\cr 0&\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix};
(14)
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
=
(
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
+
g
x
вҖӢ
g
x
T
g
x
вҖӢ
Оі
x
Оі
x
вҖӢ
g
x
T
Оі
x
2
)
=
(
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
0
0
0
)
+
(
g
x
Оі
x
)
вҖӢ
(
g
x
T
Оі
x
)
.
\widetilde{X}_{new}\widetilde{X}_{new}^{T}=\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T}+g_{x}g_{x}^{T}&g_{x}\gamma_{x}\cr\gamma_{x}g_{x}^{T}&\gamma_{x}^{2}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T}&0\cr 0&0\end{pmatrix}+\begin{pmatrix}g_{x}\cr\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}g_{x}^{T}&\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix}.
(15)
(2)
Оі
x
=
0
\gamma_{x}=0
In this case
Q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
Q
x
Q_{x,new}=Q_{x}
,
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
X
~
g
x
)
\widetilde{X}_{new}=\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{X}&g_{x}\end{pmatrix}
, and
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
=
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
+
g
x
вҖӢ
g
x
T
.
\widetilde{X}_{new}\widetilde{X}_{new}^{T}=\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T}+g_{x}g_{x}^{T}.
(16)
Q
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
Q_{y,new}
and
Y
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\widetilde{Y}_{new}
are computed in the same way, and
Q
x
,
y
(
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
Q_{x,y}^{(new)}
can be computed as (e.g. if
Оі
x
вү 
0
,
Оі
y
вү 
0
\gamma_{x}\neq 0,\gamma_{y}\neq 0
)
Q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
вҖӢ
Q
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
Q
x
T
q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
)
вҖӢ
(
Q
y
q
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
=
(
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
Q
y
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
q
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
вҖӢ
Q
y
q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
вҖӢ
q
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
.
Q_{x,new}^{T}Q_{y,new}=\begin{pmatrix}Q_{x}^{T}\cr q_{x,new}^{T}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}Q_{y}&q_{y,new}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}Q_{x}^{T}Q_{y}&Q_{x}^{T}q_{y,new}\cr q_{x,new}^{T}Q_{y}&q_{x,new}^{T}q_{y,new}\end{pmatrix}.
(17)
An important detail is that the updated matrices
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\widetilde{X}_{new}
,
Y
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\widetilde{Y}_{new}
are not explicitly computed. Instead, the algorithm computes the Rayleigh quotient using the formula (
11
) and keeps the updated products
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
\widetilde{X}_{new}\widetilde{X}_{new}^{T}
(using (
15
), (
16
)), and analogously
Y
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
Y
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
\widetilde{Y}_{new}\widetilde{Y}_{new}^{T}
and
Y
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
\widetilde{Y}_{new}\widetilde{X}_{new}^{T}
, whose dimensions depend on the numerical ranks (column dimensions of
Q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
Q_{x,new}
and
Q
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
Q_{y,new}
). This is advantageous in the case of large number of high-dimensional data snapshots and small numerical ranks.
2.1.1
Reorthogonalization
In finite precision computation, the test
Оі
x
вү 
0
\gamma_{x}\neq 0
is implemented using a caller-provided tolerance
tol
1
\texttt{tol}{}_{1}
, i.e. if
Оі
x
<
tol
вҲҘ
1
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲҘ
2
\gamma_{x}<\texttt{tol}{}_{1}\|\mathbf{x}_{new}\|_{2}
, then
Q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
Q
x
Q_{x,new}=Q_{x}
(case (2) applies).
There is a subtlety here.
The Gram-Schmidt procedure in floating-point arithmetic may fail to compute numerically orthogonal vectors, see e.g.
BjГ¶rck (
1994
)
. A well-known remedy is reorthogonalization that is indicated when
Оі
x
\gamma_{x}
is small relative to
вҖ–
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖ–
2
\|\mathbf{x}_{new}\|_{2}
. (
Оі
x
/
вҖ–
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖ–
2
\gamma_{x}/\|\mathbf{x}_{new}\|_{2}
is the sine of the angle between
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\mathbf{x}_{new}
and
range
вҖӢ
(
Q
x
)
\mathrm{range}(Q_{x})
.) But in the context of low rank representation of the data, small
Оі
x
\gamma_{x}
means that
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\mathbf{x}_{new}
can be approximated from the range of
Q
x
Q_{x}
and that adding new vector to the orthonormal basis is not necessary. As a result, instead of reorthogonalization,
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\mathbf{x}_{new}
is replaced by its projection onto
range
вҖӢ
(
Q
x
)
\mathrm{range}(Q_{x})
. In other words, we do not insist in generating new direction, orthogonal to
range
вҖӢ
(
Q
x
)
\mathrm{range}(Q_{x})
.
This opens the question of the choice of the threshold
tol
1
\texttt{tol}{}_{1}
. To that end, note that
Оі
x
\gamma_{x}
is the norm of the minimal change
О”
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\Delta\mathbf{x}_{new}
such that
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
+
О”
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲҲ
range
вҖӢ
(
Q
x
)
\mathbf{x}_{new}+\Delta\mathbf{x}_{new}\in\mathrm{range}(Q_{x})
. Assume that the data snapshots contain an initial uncertainty such that
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\mathbf{x}_{new}
contains noise
Оҙ
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\delta\mathbf{x}_{new}
such that
вҖ–
Оҙ
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖ–
2
вүӨ
О·
вҖӢ
вҖ–
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖ–
2
\|\delta\mathbf{x}_{new}\|_{2}\leq\eta\|\mathbf{x}_{new}\|_{2}
for some
О·
вҲҲ
[
0
,
1
)
\eta\in[0,1)
.
Hence, it is reasonable to set
tol
=
1
max
{
О·
,
m
рқңә
}
\texttt{tol}{}_{1}=\max\{\eta,m\mbox{$\varepsilon$}\}
, where
рқңә
\varepsilon
is the roundoff unit of the working precision.
The reorthogonalization works as follows. Let in (
13
)
рқҗұ
вҖІ
=
c
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
p
вҖӢ
u
вҖӢ
t
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
d
вҖӢ
(
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
Q
x
вҖӢ
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
\mathbf{x}^{\prime}=computed(\mathbf{x}_{new}-Q_{x}Q_{x}^{T}\mathbf{x}_{new})
denote the computed vector, which is not necessarily numerically orthogonal to the columns of
Q
x
Q_{x}
. Then
(
Q
x
рқҗұ
вҖІ
)
=
(
Q
x
рқҗұ
вҖІ
вҲ’
Q
x
вҖӢ
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
вҖІ
)
вҖӢ
(
I
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
вҖІ
рқҹҺ
1
)
=
(
Q
x
q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖІ
)
вҖӢ
(
I
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
вҖІ
рқҹҺ
Оі
x
вҖІ
)
,
Оі
x
вҖІ
=
вҖ–
рқҗұ
вҖІ
вҲ’
Q
x
вҖӢ
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
вҖІ
вҖ–
2
,
\begin{pmatrix}Q_{x}&\mathbf{x}^{\prime}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}Q_{x}&\mathbf{x}^{\prime}-Q_{x}Q_{x}^{T}\mathbf{x}^{\prime}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}I&Q_{x}^{T}\mathbf{x}^{\prime}\cr\mathbf{0}&1\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}Q_{x}&q_{x,new}^{\prime}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}I&Q_{x}^{T}\mathbf{x}^{\prime}\cr\mathbf{0}&\gamma_{x}^{\prime}\end{pmatrix},\;\;\gamma_{x}^{\prime}=\|\mathbf{x}^{\prime}-Q_{x}Q_{x}^{T}\mathbf{x}^{\prime}\|_{2},
and, with
g
x
вҖІ
=
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
вҖІ
g_{x}^{\prime}=Q_{x}^{T}\mathbf{x}^{\prime}
,
X
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\displaystyle X_{new}
=
\displaystyle=
(
Q
x
q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖІ
)
вҖӢ
(
I
g
x
вҖІ
рқҹҺ
Оі
x
вҖІ
)
вҖӢ
(
X
~
g
x
рқҹҺ
1
)
=
(
Q
x
q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖІ
)
вҖӢ
(
X
~
g
x
+
g
x
вҖІ
рқҹҺ
Оі
x
вҖІ
)
.
\displaystyle\begin{pmatrix}Q_{x}&q_{x,new}^{\prime}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}I&g_{x}^{\prime}\cr\mathbf{0}&\gamma_{x}^{\prime}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{X}&g_{x}\cr\mathbf{0}&1\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}Q_{x}&q_{x,new}^{\prime}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{X}&g_{x}+g_{x}^{\prime}\cr\mathbf{0}&\gamma_{x}^{\prime}\end{pmatrix}.
In practice, reorthogonalization can be set as default, or (to avoid unnecessary computation) it can be switched on only when necessary, based on the comparison of the ratio
Оі
x
/
вҖ–
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖ–
2
\gamma_{x}/\|\mathbf{x}_{new}\|_{2}
with a suitably set threshold value
tol
2
\texttt{tol}{}_{2}
(e.g.
tol
=
2
0.1
\texttt{tol}{}_{2}=0.1
).
By the KahanвҖ“ParlettвҖҷs вҖңtwice is enoughвҖқ theorem, it suffices to apply the reorthogonalization once, so that the GramвҖ“Schmidt step is applied twice.
2
2
2
In
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
, the function
update
uses
5
5
steps by default.
The threshold value
tol
2
\texttt{tol}{}_{2}
can be tuned to set an acceptable level of numerical orthogonality. The reorthogonalization can also be simply set as default, but in the case of large dimension
m
m
applying
Q
Q
even when it is not necessary incurs costly data movement and flops.
Algorithm 2
[
рқҗӘ
,
g
,
Оі
]
[\mathbf{q},g,\gamma]
=
GS_update
(
Q
,
рқҗұ
,
tol
,
1
tol
2
Q,\mathbf{x},\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2}
)
0:
Orthonormal
Q
вҲҲ
в„қ
m
Г—
k
Q\in\mathbb{R}^{m\times k}
;
рқҗұ
вҲҲ
в„қ
m
\mathbf{x}\in\mathbb{R}^{m}
; tolerance thresholds
tol
,
1
tol
2
\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2}
.
0:
рқҗӘ
\mathbf{q}
,
g
g
,
Оі
\gamma
1:
g
=
Q
T
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
g=Q^{T}\mathbf{x}
;
рқҗӘ
=
рқҗұ
вҲ’
Q
вҖӢ
g
\mathbf{q}=\mathbf{x}-Qg
;
Оі
=
вҖ–
рқҗӘ
вҖ–
2
\gamma=\|\mathbf{q}\|_{2}
;
2:
if
Оі
>
tol
вҲҘ
1
рқҗұ
вҲҘ
2
\gamma>\texttt{tol}{}_{1}\|\mathbf{x}\|_{2}
then
3:
if
Оі
>
tol
вҲҘ
2
рқҗұ
вҲҘ
2
\gamma>\texttt{tol}{}_{2}\|\mathbf{x}\|_{2}
then
4:
рқҗӘ
=
рқҗӘ
/
Оі
\mathbf{q}=\mathbf{q}/\gamma
;
5:
else
6:
g
вҖІ
=
Q
T
вҖӢ
рқҗӘ
g^{\prime}=Q^{T}\mathbf{q}
;
рқҗӘ
=
рқҗӘ
вҲ’
Q
вҖӢ
g
вҖІ
\mathbf{q}=\mathbf{q}-Qg^{\prime}
;
g
=
g
+
g
вҖІ
g=g+g^{\prime}
;
Оі
=
вҖ–
рқҗӘ
вҖ–
2
\gamma=\|\mathbf{q}\|_{2}
;
рқҗӘ
=
рқҗӘ
/
Оі
\mathbf{q}=\mathbf{q}/\gamma
;
7:
end
if
8:
else
9:
Оі
=
0
\gamma=0
; {
рқҗұ
\mathbf{x}
brings no new direction}
10:
end
if
Remark 1
.
The numerical rank of each
X
~
\widetilde{X}
is tested when computing the Rayleigh quotient (
11
). The software in
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
3
3
3
Matlab function
compute_modes
in the class
StreamingDMD
.
uses MatlabвҖҷs function
pinv(.)
to explicitly compute the pseudoinverse of
G
x
G_{x}
, where
G
x
=
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
G_{x}=\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T}
is updated using the formulas
(
15
), (
16
). Recall that
pinv
вҖӢ
(
G
x
)
\texttt{pinv}(G_{x})
computes the SVD
G
x
=
U
g
вҖӢ
ОЈ
g
вҖӢ
V
g
T
G_{x}=U_{g}\Sigma_{g}V_{g}^{T}
, and discards the singular values that are less or equal to
4
4
4
In Matlab notation, this threshold reads
max
вҒЎ
(
size
вҖӢ
(
G
x
)
)
вҲ—
eps
вҖӢ
(
norm
вҖӢ
(
G
x
)
)
\max(\texttt{size}(G_{x}))*\texttt{eps}(\texttt{norm}(G_{x}))
.
Оө
вҖӢ
r
x
вҖӢ
вҖ–
G
x
вҖ–
2
\varepsilon r_{x}\|G_{x}\|_{2}
, where
Оө
\varepsilon
is the round-off unit. This default threshold value can be changed into caller specified value
tol
by an additional input parameter,
pinv
вҖӢ
(
G
x
,
tol
)
\texttt{pinv}(G_{x},\texttt{tol})
, which is important in the case of noisy data. It should be noted that the
svd(.)
and
pinv(.)
functions assume non-symmetric matrix, and that it would be more efficient to compute the SVD as the spectral decomposition of
G
x
G_{x}
using the
eig(.)
function, then truncate small singular values
5
5
5
For symmetric positive semidefinite matrices, the eigenvalues and the singular values are the same set; the spectral decomposition is the SVD.
using a suitable threshold.
Since in each step
G
x
G_{x}
changed by a rank-one correction, fast updates can be used.
2.1.2
Low rank constraints
Suppose that, given the dimensions of the problem and the operational constraints, there is an upper limit
r
^
\widehat{r}
for the number of columns in
Q
x
Q_{x}
. In relation to this,
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
proposes additional steps to control the numerical ranks of
X
~
\widetilde{X}
and
Y
~
\widetilde{Y}
. We now describe a variation of the procedure from
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
.
Let the number of columns of the new updated
Q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
Q_{x,new}
reach the maximal dimension
r
^
\widehat{r}
. Consider the factorization (
13
) of
X
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
X_{new}
, and let
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
О©
вҖӢ
ОЈ
вҖӢ
Оһ
T
\widetilde{X}_{new}=\Omega\Sigma\Xi^{T}
be the SVD.
To make the next step feasible (under the constraint of maximal rank
r
^
\widehat{r}
),
it suffices to replace
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\widetilde{X}_{new}
with
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖІ
=
О©
(
:
,
1
:
r
^
вҲ’
1
)
ОЈ
(
1
:
r
^
вҲ’
1
,
1
:
r
^
вҲ’
1
)
Оһ
(
:
,
1
:
r
^
вҲ’
1
)
T
.
\widetilde{X}_{new}\prime=\Omega{(:,1:\widehat{r}-1)}\Sigma(1:\widehat{r}-1,1:\widehat{r}-1)\Xi(:,1:\widehat{r}-1)^{T}.
This strategy is implemented in the software accompanying
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
. By the Eckart-Young-Mirsky theorem, this is the best rankвҖ“
(
r
^
вҲ’
1
)
(\widehat{r}-1)
approximation of
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\widetilde{X}_{new}
, and the maximal rank constraints is enforced with minimal damage to the data.
On the other hand,
the SVD of
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\widetilde{X}_{new}
may reveal that the numerical rank is even smaller in the sense that for some index
ПҒ
x
<
r
^
вҲ’
1
\rho_{x}<\widehat{r}-1
and acceptably small tolerance
tol
3
\texttt{tol}{}_{3}
,
Пғ
ПҒ
x
+
1
вҖӢ
(
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
<
tol
вҖӢ
Пғ
1
3
вҖӢ
(
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
\sigma_{\rho_{x}+1}(\widetilde{X}_{new})<\texttt{tol}{}_{3}\sigma_{1}(\widetilde{X}_{new})
. This yields a rankвҖ“
ПҒ
x
\rho_{x}
approximation
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вүҲ
О©
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
ОЈ
(
1
:
ПҒ
x
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
Оһ
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
T
.
\widetilde{X}_{new}\approx\Omega(:,1:\rho_{x})\Sigma(1:\rho_{x},1:\rho_{x})\Xi(:,1:\rho_{x})^{T}.
Since
X
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
Q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
О©
)
вҖӢ
ОЈ
вҖӢ
Оһ
T
X_{new}=(Q_{x,new}\Omega)\Sigma\Xi^{T}
is the SVD, we have optimal low rank approximation
X
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вүҲ
Q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
О©
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
ОЈ
(
1
:
ПҒ
x
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
Оһ
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
T
=
Q
^
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
X
^
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
,
Q
^
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
Q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
О©
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
,
X_{new}\approx Q_{x,new}\Omega(:,1:\rho_{x})\Sigma(1:\rho_{x},1:\rho_{x})\Xi(:,1:\rho_{x})^{T}=\widehat{Q}_{x,new}\widehat{X}_{new},\;\;\widehat{Q}_{x,new}=Q_{x,new}\Omega(:,1:\rho_{x}),\;
and
X
^
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
ОЈ
(
1
:
ПҒ
x
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
Оһ
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
T
=
О©
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
T
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\widehat{X}_{new}=\Sigma(1:\rho_{x},1:\rho_{x})\Xi(:,1:\rho_{x})^{T}=\Omega(:,1:\rho_{x})^{T}\widetilde{X}_{new}
is used through the cross product
X
^
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
X
^
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
=
ОЈ
(
1
:
ПҒ
x
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
2
\widehat{X}_{new}\widehat{X}_{new}^{T}=\Sigma(1:\rho_{x},1:\rho_{x})^{2}
. This means that the matrix
Оһ
\Xi
of the right singular
vectors is not needed and that it suffices to compute the spectral decomposition
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
=
О©
вҖӢ
Оӣ
вҖӢ
О©
T
\widetilde{X}_{new}\widetilde{X}_{new}^{T}=\Omega\Lambda\Omega^{T}
with decreasing eigenvalues along the diagonal of
Оӣ
=
ОЈ
2
\Lambda=\Sigma^{2}
.
Matrix
G
x
G_{x}
is then changed to
Оӣ
(
1
:
ПҒ
x
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
\Lambda(1:\rho_{x},1:\rho_{x})
.
This formulation is in accordance with the structure of the algorithm that keeps and updates only the crossвҖ“products
(
16
). The cross product
G
y
,
x
=
Y
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
вҖӢ
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
G_{y,x}=\widetilde{Y}_{new}^{T}\widetilde{X}_{new}
is changed to
Y
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
вҖӢ
X
^
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\widetilde{Y}_{new}^{T}\widehat{X}_{new}
implicitly by updating
G
y
,
x
G_{y,x}
into
G
y
,
x
О©
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
G_{y,x}\Omega(:,1:\rho_{x})
. Similarly,
Q
x
,
y
=
Q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
вҖӢ
Q
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
Q_{x,y}=Q_{x,new}^{T}Q_{y,new}
is changed into
О©
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
T
Q
x
,
y
\Omega(:,1:\rho_{x})^{T}Q_{x,y}
.
The value
ПҒ
x
\rho_{x}
is determined using the callerвҖҷs supplied tolerance
tol
3
\texttt{tol}{}_{3}
, so the rank will be reduced only if it can be done within the prescribed tolerance. If the memory space is critical, the rank reduction can be simply enforced. It should be noted that enforcing the hard-coded maximal rank may introduce unacceptably large error вҖ“ one option is to override the constraint and/or issue a warning message. Further, if an estimate of the level of noise in the data is available,
6
6
6
See В§
2.1.1
.
it can be used to reduce the rank whenever possible, as described above.
Remark 2
.
The formula (
17
) efficiently updates the first factor in (
11
) after adding
(
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
,
рқҗІ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
(\mathbf{x}_{new},\mathbf{y}_{new})
.
In the case of reducing the basis
Q
y
Q_{y}
the update is analogous, using the rank revealing spectral decomposition
Y
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
Y
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
вүҲ
О©
Y
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
y
)
ОЈ
Y
(
1
:
ПҒ
y
,
1
:
ПҒ
y
)
2
О©
Y
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
y
)
T
.
\widetilde{Y}_{new}\widetilde{Y}_{new}^{T}\approx\Omega_{Y}(:,1:\rho_{y})\Sigma_{Y}(1:\rho_{y},1:\rho_{y})^{2}\Omega_{Y}(:,1:\rho_{y})^{T}.
The first factor in (
11
) is computed as
Q
^
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
вҖӢ
Q
^
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
О©
X
T
вҖӢ
(
Q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
вҖӢ
Q
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
вҖӢ
О©
Y
\widehat{Q}_{x,new}^{T}\widehat{Q}_{y,new}=\Omega_{X}^{T}\left(Q_{x,new}^{T}Q_{y,new}\right)\Omega_{Y}
,
where the inner factor is updated using
(
17
)
.
If the maximum rank
r
^
\widehat{r}
is not imposed, it is not necessary to compute and update the matrix
G
y
G_{y}
.
The updating procedure is summarized in Algorithm
3
. The details of enforcing the maximal rank
(as described above) that correspond to Line 14 are omitted for the sake of brevity.
Algorithm 3
[
Q
x
,
Q
y
,
Q
x
,
y
,
G
y
,
x
,
G
x
,
G
y
]
[Q_{x},Q_{y},Q_{x,y},G_{y,x},G_{x},G_{y}]
=
Addxy_compress
(
Q
x
,
Q
y
,
Q
x
,
y
,
G
y
,
x
,
G
x
,
G
y
,
рқҗұ
,
рқҗІ
,
r
^
,
tol
,
1
tol
,
2
tol
3
Q_{x},Q_{y},Q_{x,y},G_{y,x},G_{x},G_{y},\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y},\widehat{r},\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2},\texttt{tol}{}_{3}
)
0:
orthonormal
Q
x
,
Q
y
Q_{x},Q_{y}
from (
8
); cross products
Q
x
,
y
,
G
y
,
x
,
G
x
,
G
y
Q_{x,y},G_{y,x},G_{x},G_{y}
from (
12
); new data
рқҗұ
,
рқҗІ
\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}
; maximal dimension
r
^
\widehat{r}
; tolerances
tol
,
1
tol
,
2
tol
3
\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2},\texttt{tol}{}_{3}
0:
Updated matrices
Q
x
,
Q
y
,
Q
x
,
y
,
G
y
,
x
,
G
x
,
G
y
Q_{x},Q_{y},Q_{x,y},G_{y,x},G_{x},G_{y}
1:
[
рқҗӘ
x
,
g
x
,
Оі
x
]
[\mathbf{q}_{x},g_{x},\gamma_{x}]
=
GS_update
(
Q
x
,
рқҗұ
,
tol
,
1
tol
2
Q_{x},\mathbf{x},\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2}
);
2:
[
рқҗӘ
y
,
g
y
,
Оі
y
]
[\mathbf{q}_{y},g_{y},\gamma_{y}]
=
GS_update
(
Q
y
,
рқҗІ
,
tol
,
1
tol
2
Q_{y},\mathbf{y},\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2}
);
3:
G
x
=
G
x
+
g
x
вҖӢ
g
x
T
G_{x}=G_{x}+g_{x}g_{x}^{T}
;
G
y
=
G
y
+
g
y
вҖӢ
g
y
T
G_{y}=G_{y}+g_{y}g_{y}^{T}
;
G
y
,
x
=
G
y
,
x
+
g
y
вҖӢ
g
x
T
G_{y,x}=G_{y,x}+g_{y}g_{x}^{T}
;
4:
if
Оі
x
>
0
\gamma_{x}>0
and
Оі
y
>
0
\gamma_{y}>0
then
5:
Q
x
,
y
=
(
Q
x
,
y
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
рқҗӘ
y
рқҗӘ
x
T
вҖӢ
Q
y
рқҗӘ
x
T
вҖӢ
рқҗӘ
y
)
Q_{x,y}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}Q_{x,y}&Q_{x}^{T}\mathbf{q}_{y}\\
\mathbf{q}_{x}^{T}Q_{y}&\mathbf{q}_{x}^{T}\mathbf{q}_{y}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
;
Q
x
=
(
Q
x
вҖӢ
рқҗӘ
x
)
Q_{x}=(Q_{x}\;\mathbf{q}_{x})
;
Q
y
=
(
Q
y
вҖӢ
рқҗӘ
y
)
Q_{y}=(Q_{y}\;\mathbf{q}_{y})
;
6:
G
y
,
x
=
(
G
y
,
x
g
y
вҖӢ
Оі
x
Оі
y
вҖӢ
g
x
T
Оі
x
вҖӢ
Оі
y
)
G_{y,x}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}G_{y,x}&g_{y}\gamma_{x}\cr\gamma_{y}g_{x}^{T}&\gamma_{x}\gamma_{y}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
;
G
x
=
(
G
x
g
x
вҖӢ
Оі
x
Оі
x
вҖӢ
g
x
T
Оі
x
2
)
G_{x}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}G_{x}&g_{x}\gamma_{x}\cr\gamma_{x}g_{x}^{T}&\gamma_{x}^{2}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
;
G
y
=
(
G
y
g
y
вҖӢ
Оі
y
Оі
y
вҖӢ
g
y
T
Оі
y
2
)
G_{y}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}G_{y}&g_{y}\gamma_{y}\cr\gamma_{y}g_{y}^{T}&\gamma_{y}^{2}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
;
7:
end
if
8:
if
Оі
x
>
0
\gamma_{x}>0
and
Оі
y
=
0
\gamma_{y}=0
then
9:
Q
x
,
y
=
(
Q
x
,
y
рқҗӘ
x
T
вҖӢ
Q
y
)
Q_{x,y}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}Q_{x,y}\\
\mathbf{q}_{x}^{T}Q_{y}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
;
Q
x
=
(
Q
x
вҖӢ
рқҗӘ
x
)
Q_{x}=(Q_{x}\;\mathbf{q}_{x})
;
G
y
,
x
=
(
G
y
,
x
g
y
вҖӢ
Оі
x
)
G_{y,x}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}G_{y,x}&g_{y}\gamma_{x}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
;
G
x
=
(
G
x
g
x
вҖӢ
Оі
x
Оі
x
вҖӢ
g
x
T
Оі
x
2
)
G_{x}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}G_{x}&g_{x}\gamma_{x}\\
\gamma_{x}g_{x}^{T}&\gamma_{x}^{2}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
;
10:
end
if
11:
if
Оі
x
=
0
\gamma_{x}=0
and
Оі
y
>
0
\gamma_{y}>0
then
12:
Q
x
,
y
=
(
Q
x
,
y
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
рқҗӘ
y
)
Q_{x,y}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}Q_{x,y}&Q_{x}^{T}\mathbf{q}_{y}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
;
Q
y
=
(
Q
y
вҖӢ
рқҗӘ
y
)
Q_{y}=(Q_{y}\;\mathbf{q}_{y})
;
G
y
,
x
=
(
G
y
,
x
Оі
y
вҖӢ
g
x
T
)
G_{y,x}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}G_{y,x}\\
\gamma_{y}g_{x}^{T}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
;
G
y
=
(
G
y
g
y
вҖӢ
Оі
y
Оі
y
вҖӢ
g
y
T
Оі
y
2
)
G_{y}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}G_{y}&g_{y}\gamma_{y}\\
\gamma_{y}g_{y}^{T}&\gamma_{y}^{2}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
;
13:
end
if
14:
If
Q
x
Q_{x}
or
Q
y
Q_{y}
have reached
r
^
\widehat{r}
columns, do the procedure described in В§
2.1.2
2.2
The compressed streaming DMD algorithm
Equipped with Algorithm
3
, the compressed streaming DMD of the new data, after receiving
рқҗұ
,
рқҗІ
\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}
, can be compactly written as Algorithm
4
.
Algorithm 4
[
Z
,
Оӣ
]
[Z,\Lambda]
=
DMDstream_compress
(
Q
x
,
Q
y
,
Q
x
,
y
,
G
y
,
x
,
G
x
,
G
y
,
рқҗұ
,
рқҗІ
,
r
^
,
tol
,
1
tol
,
2
tol
3
Q_{x},Q_{y},Q_{x,y},G_{y,x},G_{x},G_{y},\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y},\widehat{r},\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2},\texttt{tol}{}_{3}
)
0:
orthonormal
Q
x
,
Q
y
Q_{x},Q_{y}
from (
8
); cross products
Q
x
,
y
,
G
y
,
x
,
G
x
,
G
y
Q_{x,y},G_{y,x},G_{x},G_{y}
from (
12
); new data
рқҗұ
,
рқҗІ
\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}
; maximal dimension
r
^
\widehat{r}
; tolerances
tol
,
1
tol
,
2
tol
3
\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2},\texttt{tol}{}_{3}
0:
Ritz pairs
(
Z
,
Оӣ
)
(Z,\Lambda)
1:
[
Q
x
,
Q
y
,
Q
x
,
y
,
G
y
,
x
,
G
x
,
G
y
]
=
[Q_{x},Q_{y},Q_{x,y},G_{y,x},G_{x},G_{y}]=
Addxy_compress
(
Q
x
,
Q
y
,
Q
x
,
y
,
G
y
,
x
,
G
x
,
G
y
,
рқҗұ
,
рқҗІ
,
r
^
x
,
r
^
y
,
tol
,
1
tol
,
2
tol
)
3
\texttt{Addxy\_compress}(Q_{x},Q_{y},Q_{x,y},G_{y,x},G_{x},G_{y},\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y},\widehat{r}_{x},\widehat{r}_{y},\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2},\texttt{tol}{}_{3})
;
2:
A
~
=
Q
x
,
y
вҖӢ
G
y
,
x
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
\widetilde{A}=Q_{x,y}G_{y,x}G_{x}^{-1}
;
3:
[
W
,
Оӣ
]
=
eig
вҖӢ
(
A
~
)
[W,\Lambda]=\texttt{eig}(\widetilde{A})
;
4:
Z
=
Q
x
вҖӢ
W
Z=Q_{x}W
.
Remark 3
.
Since
G
x
G_{x}
and
G
y
G_{y}
are symmetric, it suffices to keep and update their upper triangles (diagonals included).
Efficient and robust eigensolvers such as the LAPACKвҖҷs functions
xSYEV, xSYEVD
on input require only the upper
or the lower triangle, and the computed eigenvectors (when requested) overwrite the initial array, so that the computations involving
G
x
G_{x}
and
G
y
G_{y}
can be optimized for memory. Note that
G
y
G_{y}
is computed only for the purpose of reducing the rank.
Example 2.1
.
To illustrate the key numerical parameters and their behavior (low rank representation, orthogonality of the bases, the residuals (
6
), condition numbers) in the streaming DMD, we use the numerical simulation of the twoвҖ“dimensional cylinder wake data, available in the supplementary materials
Kutz
et al.
to the book
(Kutz
et al.
,
2016
, В§2.3)
.
The observable is the vorticity, and the results are shown in Figure
1
. The low rank constraints are
r
^
=
30
\widehat{r}=30
(first row) and
r
^
=
100
\widehat{r}=100
(second row).
Figure 1:
Left panels:
Test of the low rank representation (
8
) and the orthogonality of the bases
Q
x
Q_{x}
,
Q
y
Q_{y}
. Note how the low rank constraints (В§
2.1.2
) here set to
30
30
(first row) and
100
100
(second row)) impact the accuracy of the representation.
Middle panels:
The condition numbers of the key matrices.
Right panels:
The DMD eigenvalues computed after receiving the last snapshot. The colors encode the corresponding residuals. In the second row, the eigenvalues from the first row are shown as purple hexagons. (The system is measure preserving and the underlying Koopman operator is unitary. The true eigenvalues are on the unit circle.)
3
Modifications of the compressed streaming DMD
The compressed streaming DMD performed well on real world data
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
,
Yang
et al.
(
2022
)
.
In this section, we show that, in addition to the details discussed in В§
2
, the method can be further improved in terms of numerical robustness and functionality.
The relations (
10
), (
11
) actually express
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
AQ_{x}
and
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
Q_{x}^{T}AQ_{x}
as
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
\displaystyle AQ_{x}
=
\displaystyle=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
вҖ 
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
вҖӢ
(
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
)
вҲ’
1
,
\displaystyle Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{\dagger}=Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{T}(\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T})^{-1},
(18)
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
\displaystyle Q_{x}^{T}AQ_{x}
=
\displaystyle=
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
вҖ 
=
(
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
Q
y
)
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
)
вҖӢ
(
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
)
вҲ’
1
=
Q
x
,
y
вҖӢ
G
y
,
x
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
,
\displaystyle Q_{x}^{T}Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{\dagger}=(Q_{x}^{T}Q_{y})(\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{T})(\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T})^{-1}=Q_{x,y}G_{y,x}G_{x}^{-1},
(19)
and the formula (
19
) is used in
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
as a dimension-reduction technique in cases of large number of data snapshots that evolve on a low dimensional manifold. The column dimensions of
Q
x
Q_{x}
and
Q
y
Q_{y}
are much smaller than the number
n
n
of data pairs
(
рқҗұ
,
рқҗІ
)
(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y})
, and the matrices
X
~
\widetilde{X}
,
Y
~
\widetilde{Y}
are not computed.
A drawback of this is, as illustrated in Example
2.1
, that the condition number of
X
~
\widetilde{X}
is squared:
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
G
x
)
=
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
)
=
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
X
~
)
2
\kappa_{2}(G_{x})=\kappa_{2}(\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T})=\kappa_{2}(\widetilde{X})^{2}
.
Hence, we have to resolve the tradeoff between the numerical stability and the efficiency in the case of large number
m
m
of data snapshots of low-dimensional dynamics. This is accomplished in В§
3.1
.
In В§
3.2
, we show how to further enhance the method by computing the Exact DMD vectors (in the framework developed in В§
3.1
), and using them for the the KMD. We conclude this section with the discussion in В§
3.3
, that motivates further development in В§
4
.
3.1
Avoiding squared condition number
The condition number of
G
x
G_{x}
may become critical in large dimensional applications, using GPU hardware with lower working precision, e.g. 32 instead of 64 bit arithmetic, or in applications that combine low and high precision. Low/mixed precision reduces the volume of the data and the memory traffic, and it is a way to tackle large scale problems on parallel computers.
In such a setting, it is in particular important to avoid operations that square the condition number.
3.1.1
Theory behind the growth of
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
G
x
)
\kappa_{2}(G_{x})
The behaviour of the condition number
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
G
x
)
\kappa_{2}(G_{x})
, shown in Example
2.1
, is an insidious and potentially serious problem.
It is easily explained using the following classical theorem from matrix analysis (see e.g.
(Horn and Johnson,
1990
, Theorem 4.3.4)
).
Theorem 3.1
.
Let
H
H
be
n
Г—
n
n\times n
Hermitian,
v
вҲҲ
в„Ӯ
n
v\in\mathbb{C}^{n}
, and let
О»
i
вҖӢ
(
вӢ…
)
\lambda_{i}(\cdot)
denote the
i
i
-th smallest eigenvalue of a Hermitian matrix (
О»
1
вҖӢ
(
вӢ…
)
вүӨ
вӢҜ
вүӨ
О»
n
вҖӢ
(
вӢ…
)
\lambda_{1}(\cdot)\leq\cdots\leq\lambda_{n}(\cdot)
). Then the eigenvalues of
H
H
and
H
Вұ
v
вҖӢ
v
вҲ—
H\pm vv^{*}
interlace:
О»
i
вҖӢ
(
H
Вұ
v
вҖӢ
v
вҲ—
)
вүӨ
О»
i
+
1
вҖӢ
(
H
)
вүӨ
О»
i
+
2
вҖӢ
(
H
Вұ
v
вҖӢ
v
вҲ—
)
,
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
n
вҲ’
2
;
\displaystyle\lambda_{i}(H\pm vv^{*})\leq\lambda_{i+1}(H)\leq\lambda_{i+2}(H\pm vv^{*}),\;\;\;i=1,\ldots,n-2;
О»
i
вҖӢ
(
H
)
вүӨ
О»
i
+
1
вҖӢ
(
H
Вұ
v
вҖӢ
v
вҲ—
)
вүӨ
О»
i
+
2
вҖӢ
(
H
)
,
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
n
вҲ’
2
.
\displaystyle\lambda_{i}(H)\leq\lambda_{i+1}(H\pm vv^{*})\leq\lambda_{i+2}(H),\;\;\;i=1,\ldots,n-2.
Also, by the WeylвҖҷs theorem,
max
i
вҒЎ
|
О»
i
вҖӢ
(
H
)
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
(
H
Вұ
v
вҖӢ
v
вҲ—
)
|
вүӨ
вҖ–
v
вҖӢ
v
вҲ—
вҖ–
2
=
вҖ–
v
вҖ–
2
2
\max_{i}|\lambda_{i}(H)-\lambda_{i}(H\pm vv^{*})|\leq\|vv^{*}\|_{2}=\|v\|_{2}^{2}
, and by the monotonicity principle
О»
i
вҖӢ
(
H
+
v
вҖӢ
v
вҲ—
)
вүҘ
О»
i
вҖӢ
(
H
)
\lambda_{i}(H+vv^{*})\geq\lambda_{i}(H)
for all
i
i
.
Proposition 3.2
.
In the case of the rank-one update (
15
), with
Оі
x
вү 
0
\gamma_{x}\neq 0
,
О»
min
вҖӢ
(
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
)
вүӨ
О»
min
вҖӢ
(
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
)
,
О»
max
вҖӢ
(
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
)
вүҘ
О»
max
вҖӢ
(
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
)
,
\lambda_{\min}(\widetilde{X}_{new}\widetilde{X}_{new}^{T})\leq\lambda_{\min}(\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T}),\;\;\;\lambda_{\max}(\widetilde{X}_{new}\widetilde{X}_{new}^{T})\geq\lambda_{\max}(\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T}),
i.e.
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
)
вүҘ
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
)
\kappa_{2}(\widetilde{X}_{new}\widetilde{X}_{new}^{T})\geq\kappa_{2}(\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T})
. In the case of
Оі
x
=
0
\gamma_{x}=0
,
О»
max
вҖӢ
(
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
)
вүҘ
О»
max
вҖӢ
(
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
)
\lambda_{\max}(\widetilde{X}_{new}\widetilde{X}_{new}^{T})\geq\lambda_{\max}(\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T})
, and the smallest eigenvalue satisfies
О»
min
вҖӢ
(
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
)
вҲҲ
[
О»
min
вҖӢ
(
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
)
,
О»
2
вҖӢ
(
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
)
]
\lambda_{\min}(\widetilde{X}_{new}\widetilde{X}_{new}^{T})\in[\lambda_{\min}(\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T}),\lambda_{2}(\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T})]
. (Hence, in the case
Оі
x
=
0
\gamma_{x}=0
both increase and decrease in condition number are possible.)
3.1.2
Orthogonal factorization based updates
Suppose we start with the data
(
X
,
Y
)
(X,Y)
and we compute the low rank representations
X
=
Q
x
вҖӢ
X
~
X=Q_{x}\widetilde{X}
,
Y
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
Y=Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}
(
8
). The goal is to apply the DMD for this and subsequently updated/augmented matrices, but without squaring the condition number and, analogously to (
19
), with complexity that increases with the rank instead of the number of data snapshots
n
n
. That is, the pseudoinverse
X
~
вҖ 
\widetilde{X}^{\dagger}
must be computed without using
(
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
)
вҲ’
1
(\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T})^{-1}
. The solution are suitable orthogonal factorizations.
In the sequel, we will use the notation from В§
2.1
.
If we factor
X
~
=
T
вҖӢ
Q
~
T
\widetilde{X}=T\widetilde{Q}^{T}
into orthogonal factorization (RQ with upper triangular
T
=
R
T=R
or LQ with lower triangular
T
=
L
T=L
,
Q
~
T
вҖӢ
Q
~
=
I
\widetilde{Q}^{T}\widetilde{Q}=I
) it is possible to avoid the squaring of the condition number that arises when using
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T}
. Note that
T
T
is square nonsingular.
Then
X
~
вҖ 
=
Q
~
вҖӢ
T
вҲ’
1
\widetilde{X}^{\dagger}=\widetilde{Q}T^{-1}
, but this alone is inadequate since
Q
~
\widetilde{Q}
is of same dimensions
n
Г—
r
x
n\times r_{x}
as
X
~
\widetilde{X}
вҖ”the matrix that is not computed because of the dimension
n
n
. A simple trick resolves this: using (
19
), we can write
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
=
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
Q
y
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
вҖӢ
Q
~
)
вҖӢ
T
вҲ’
1
=
Q
x
,
y
вҖӢ
G
y
,
q
вҖӢ
T
вҲ’
1
,
Q_{x}^{T}AQ_{x}=Q_{x}^{T}Q_{y}(\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{Q})T^{-1}=Q_{x,y}G_{y,q}T^{-1},
(20)
and it remains to devise an updating scheme for
G
y
,
q
=
Y
~
вҖӢ
Q
~
вҲҲ
в„қ
r
y
Г—
r
x
G_{y,q}=\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{Q}\in\mathbb{R}^{r_{y}\times r_{x}}
and
T
вҲҲ
в„қ
r
x
Г—
r
x
T\in\mathbb{R}^{r_{x}\times r_{x}}
.
Proposition 3.3
.
Let
X
=
Q
x
вҖӢ
X
~
X=Q_{x}\widetilde{X}
,
Y
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
Y=Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}
be the low-rank decompositions (
8
) of
X
X
and
Y
Y
with orthonormal
Q
x
Q_{x}
,
Q
y
Q_{y}
. Assume that the factor
T
T
from the orthogonal factorization (RQ or LQ)
X
~
=
T
вҖӢ
Q
~
T
\widetilde{X}=T\widetilde{Q}^{T}
, and the product
G
y
,
q
=
Y
~
вҖӢ
Q
~
G_{y,q}=\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{Q}
are available. Let for
X
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
X
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
X_{new}=(X\;\mathbf{x}_{new})
and
Y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
Y
вҖӢ
рқҗІ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
Y_{new}=(Y\;\mathbf{y}_{new})
the low rank factors
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\widetilde{X}_{new}
,
Y
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\widetilde{Y}_{new}
be as in В§
2.1
.
Then,
T
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T_{new}
and
G
y
,
q
(
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
=
Y
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
Q
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
G_{y,q}^{(new)}=\widetilde{Y}_{new}\widetilde{Q}_{new}
can be computed, respectively, as
T
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
{
(
T
g
x
рқҹҺ
Оі
x
)
U
G
(
:
,
1
:
r
)
,
Оі
x
>
0
(
T
g
x
)
U
G
(
:
,
1
:
r
)
,
Оі
x
=
0
вҖӢ
and
вҖӢ
G
y
,
q
(
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
=
{
(
G
y
,
q
g
y
рқҹҺ
Оі
y
)
U
G
(
:
,
1
:
r
)
,
Оі
y
>
0
(
G
y
,
q
g
y
)
U
G
(
:
,
1
:
r
)
,
Оі
y
=
0
,
T_{new}=\left\{\begin{array}[]{ll}\begin{pmatrix}T&g_{x}\\
\mathbf{0}&\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix}U_{G}\left(:,1:r\right),&\gamma_{x}>0\cr\begin{pmatrix}T&g_{x}\cr\end{pmatrix}U_{G}\left(:,1:r\right),&\gamma_{x}=0\end{array}\right.\;\;\mbox{and}\;\;G_{y,q}^{(new)}=\left\{\begin{array}[]{ll}\begin{pmatrix}G_{y,q}&g_{y}\cr\mathbf{0}&\gamma_{y}\end{pmatrix}U_{G}\left(:,1:r\right),&\gamma_{y}>0\cr\begin{pmatrix}G_{y,q}&g_{y}\end{pmatrix}U_{G}\left(:,1:r\right),&\gamma_{y}=0\end{array}\right.,
(21)
where
r
вҲҲ
{
r
x
,
r
x
+
1
}
r\in\{r_{x},r_{x}+1\}
is the rank of
X
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
X_{new}
and
U
G
U_{G}
is the product of
r
x
r_{x}
Givens rotation matrices. In the case of RQ factorization and
Оі
x
>
0
\gamma_{x}>0
,
U
G
U_{G}
is the
(
r
x
+
1
)
Г—
(
r
x
+
1
)
(r_{x}+1)\times(r_{x}+1)
identity matrix.
Proof.
Let
Оі
x
вү 
0
\gamma_{x}\neq 0
. Then
X
~
=
T
вҖӢ
Q
~
T
\widetilde{X}=T\widetilde{Q}^{T}
factors (
14
) into
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
X
~
g
x
рқҹҺ
Оі
x
)
=
(
T
g
x
рқҹҺ
Оі
x
)
вҖӢ
(
Q
~
T
рқҹҺ
рқҹҺ
1
)
=
T
ВҜ
вҖӢ
Q
ВҜ
T
.
(
T
ВҜ
=
(
x
x
x
+
0
x
x
+
0
0
x
+
0
0
0
вҲ—
)
вҖӢ
or
вҖӢ
T
ВҜ
=
(
x
0
0
+
x
x
0
+
x
x
x
+
0
0
0
вҲ—
)
)
\widetilde{X}_{new}=\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{X}&g_{x}\\
\mathbf{0}&\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}T&g_{x}\\
\mathbf{0}&\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{Q}^{T}&\mathbf{0}\\
\mathbf{0}&1\end{pmatrix}=\overline{T}\ \overline{Q}^{T}.\;\;(\overline{T}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}x&x&x&+\cr 0&x&x&+\cr 0&0&x&+\cr 0&0&0&*\end{smallmatrix}\right)\;\mbox{or}\;\overline{T}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}x&0&0&+\cr x&x&0&+\cr x&x&x&+\cr 0&0&0&*\end{smallmatrix}\right))
Hence, in the RQ case (
T
=
R
T=R
) the new factorization is readily available:
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
R
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
Q
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
\widetilde{X}_{new}=R_{new}\widetilde{Q}_{new}^{T}
with
R
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
T
ВҜ
R_{new}=\overline{T}
,
Q
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
Q
ВҜ
\widetilde{Q}_{new}=\overline{Q}
. In the case of LQ factorization (
T
=
L
T=L
),
T
ВҜ
\overline{T}
must be transformed into the lower triangular form.
This is accomplished by a sequence of Givens rotations
G
i
G_{i}
of the column pairs
(
i
,
r
x
+
1
)
(i,r_{x}+1)
,
i
=
1
,
2
,
вҖҰ
,
r
x
i=1,2,...,r_{x}
, that sequentially nullify the first
r
x
r_{x}
elements of the last column. Then
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
T
ВҜ
вҖӢ
G
1
T
вҖӢ
G
2
T
вҖӢ
вӢҜ
вҖӢ
G
r
x
T
)
вҖӢ
(
G
r
x
вҖӢ
вӢҜ
вҖӢ
G
2
вҖӢ
G
1
вҖӢ
Q
ВҜ
T
)
=
L
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
Q
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
.
(
L
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
x
0
0
0
x
x
0
0
x
x
x
0
x
x
x
x
)
)
\widetilde{X}_{new}=(\overline{T}G_{1}^{T}G_{2}^{T}\cdots G_{r_{x}}^{T})(G_{r_{x}}\cdots G_{2}G_{1}\overline{Q}^{T})=L_{new}\widetilde{Q}_{new}^{T}.\;\;(L_{new}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}x&0&0&0\cr x&x&0&0\cr x&x&x&0\cr x&x&x&x\end{smallmatrix}\right))
If
Оі
x
=
0
\gamma_{x}=0
, corrections are needed for both the RQ and the LQ factorization, because
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
X
~
g
x
)
=
(
T
g
x
)
вҖӢ
(
Q
~
T
рқҹҺ
рқҹҺ
1
)
=
T
ВҜ
вҖӢ
Q
ВҜ
T
.
(
T
ВҜ
=
(
x
x
x
+
0
x
x
+
0
0
x
+
)
вҖӢ
or
вҖӢ
T
ВҜ
=
(
x
0
0
+
x
x
0
+
x
x
x
+
)
)
\widetilde{X}_{new}=\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{X}&g_{x}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}T&g_{x}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{Q}^{T}&\mathbf{0}\\
\mathbf{0}&1\end{pmatrix}=\overline{T}\ \overline{Q}^{T}.\;\;(\overline{T}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}x&x&x&+\cr 0&x&x&+\cr 0&0&x&+\end{smallmatrix}\right)\;\mbox{or}\;\overline{T}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}x&0&0&+\cr x&x&0&+\cr x&x&x&+\end{smallmatrix}\right))
Here,
T
ВҜ
\overline{T}
is
r
x
Г—
(
r
x
+
1
)
r_{x}\times(r_{x}+1)
matrix with triangular principal
r
x
Г—
r
x
r_{x}\times r_{x}
submatrix. In both cases (
T
=
R
T=R
and
T
=
L
T=L
) Givens rotations are used, this time to completely nullify the last column of
T
ВҜ
\overline{T}
.
The result is an updated orthogonal factorization
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
T
ВҜ
вҖӢ
G
1
T
вҖӢ
G
2
T
вҖӢ
вӢҜ
вҖӢ
G
r
x
T
)
вҖӢ
(
G
r
x
вҖӢ
вӢҜ
вҖӢ
G
2
вҖӢ
G
1
вҖӢ
Q
ВҜ
T
)
=
(
T
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
рқҹҺ
)
вҖӢ
(
Q
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
q
2
T
)
=
T
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
Q
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
.
\widetilde{X}_{new}=(\overline{T}G_{1}^{T}G_{2}^{T}\cdots G_{r_{x}}^{T})(G_{r_{x}}\cdots G_{2}G_{1}\overline{Q}^{T})=\begin{pmatrix}T_{new}&\mathbf{0}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}Q_{new}^{T}\\
q_{2}^{T}\end{pmatrix}=T_{new}Q_{new}^{T}.
If
T
=
R
T=R
, the
G
i
G_{i}
вҖҷs are applied bottom-to-top and right-to-left, i.e. nullifying elements of final column from the last element to the first by performing rotations on columns
(
i
,
r
x
+
1
)
(i,r_{x}+1)
for
i
=
r
x
,
вҖҰ
,
2
,
1
i=r_{x},...,2,1
.
If
T
=
L
T=L
, the pattern is top-to-bottom and left-to-right, with pivotal indices
(
i
,
r
x
+
1
)
(i,r_{x}+1)
,
i
=
1
,
2
,
вҖҰ
,
r
x
i=1,2,...,r_{x}
(as in the case
Оі
x
вү 
0
\gamma_{x}\neq 0
).
Clearly,
Q
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
Q_{new}
is orthonormal.
This proves the first relation in (
21
), where we set
U
G
=
G
1
T
вҖӢ
G
2
T
вҖӢ
вӢҜ
вҖӢ
G
r
x
T
U_{G}=G_{1}^{T}G_{2}^{T}\cdots G_{r_{x}}^{T}
.
For the update of
G
y
,
q
=
Y
~
вҖӢ
Q
~
T
G_{y,q}=\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{Q}^{T}
, in the case
Оі
y
вү 
0
\gamma_{y}\neq 0
, use
Q
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
Q
ВҜ
вҖӢ
U
G
\widetilde{Q}_{new}=\overline{Q}U_{G}
to obtain
G
y
,
q
(
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
=
Y
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
Q
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
Y
~
g
y
рқҹҺ
T
Оі
y
)
вҖӢ
(
Q
~
рқҹҺ
рқҹҺ
1
)
вҖӢ
U
G
=
(
G
y
,
q
g
y
рқҹҺ
Оі
y
)
вҖӢ
U
G
.
G_{y,q}^{(new)}=\widetilde{Y}_{new}\widetilde{Q}_{new}=\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{Y}&g_{y}\\
\mathbf{0}^{T}&\gamma_{y}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{Q}&\mathbf{0}\\
\mathbf{0}&1\end{pmatrix}U_{G}=\begin{pmatrix}G_{y,q}&g_{y}\cr\mathbf{0}&\gamma_{y}\end{pmatrix}U_{G}.
In a completely analogous way one can show that the relation (
21
) holds for
Оі
y
=
0
\gamma_{y}=0
, as claimed.
вҲҺ
When using (
20
) instead of (
19
), the inverse is used with
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
T
)
=
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
X
~
)
=
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
X
)
=
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
G
x
)
\kappa_{2}(T)=\kappa_{2}(\widetilde{X})=\kappa_{2}(X)=\sqrt{\kappa_{2}(G_{x})}
.
The Givens rotation matrices
G
i
G_{i}
only rely on
T
T
and
g
x
g_{x}
,
Оі
x
\gamma_{x}
вҖ”the matrix
Q
~
\widetilde{Q}
is implicit. Thanks to this, the dimension
n
n
is completely avoided. In the scenario
r
x
,
r
y
вүӘ
n
вүӘ
m
r_{x},r_{y}\ll n\ll m
applying Givens rotations is inexpensive and requires
рқ’Ә
вҖӢ
(
r
2
)
\mathcal{O}(r^{2})
operations (
r
вҲј
r
x
,
r
y
r\sim r_{x},r_{y}
). In fact, in the case
T
=
R
T=R
and
Оі
x
>
0
\gamma_{x}>0
no extra effort is needed. In that sense the RQ factorization is preferred to LQ.
On the other hand, in an application scenario where before the streaming phase we start with a relatively large batch
(
X
,
Y
)
(X,Y)
and its low rank representations, the initial RQ factorization of
X
~
\widetilde{X}
must be computed. Some software packages do not contain the RQ factorization (such as Matlab), or do (such as LAPACK, MAGMA, scipy.linalg in Python) but it may be slower
7
7
7
for
100
100
instances of random matrix
A
вҲҲ
в„қ
10
5
Г—
200
A\in\mathbb{R}^{10^{5}\times 200}
it took
вүҲ
321
\approx 321
s for QR factorizations and
вүҲ
721
\approx 721
s for RQ factorizations of a
100
100
random
A
вҲҲ
в„қ
200
Г—
10
5
A\in\mathbb{R}^{200\times 10^{5}}
than the QR factorization. In addition, some additional care is needed when using these subroutines for our purposes. For example, in our case of
r
x
Г—
n
r_{x}\times n
matrix
X
~
\widetilde{X}
, the LAPACKвҖҷs
xGERQF
computes the RQ factorization as
X
~
=
(
0
0
0
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
0
0
вҲ—
)
вҖӢ
(
вҲҷ
вҲҷ
вҲҷ
вҲҷ
вҲҷ
вҲҷ
вҲҷ
вҲҷ
вҲҷ
вҲҷ
вҲҷ
вҲҷ
вҲҷ
вҲҷ
вҲҷ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
)
,
which can be used as
вҖӢ
X
~
=
(
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
вҲ—
)
вҖӢ
(
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
вӢҶ
)
.
\widetilde{X}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}0&0&0&*&*\cr 0&0&0&0&*\end{smallmatrix}\right)\left(\begin{smallmatrix}\bullet&\bullet&\bullet&\bullet&\bullet\cr\bullet&\bullet&\bullet&\bullet&\bullet\cr\bullet&\bullet&\bullet&\bullet&\bullet\cr\star&\star&\star&\star&\star\cr\star&\star&\star&\star&\star\end{smallmatrix}\right),\;\;\mbox{which can be used as}\;\;\widetilde{X}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}*&*\cr 0&*\end{smallmatrix}\right)\left(\begin{smallmatrix}\star&\star&\star&\star&\star\cr\star&\star&\star&\star&\star\end{smallmatrix}\right).
Also, LAPACK contains the function
xLASWLQ
for computing the LQ factorization of wide matrices. The LQ factorization of
X
~
\widetilde{X}
is also easily obtained by transposing the QR factorization of
X
~
T
\widetilde{X}^{T}
.
Remark 4
.
It is well known that QR factorization without pivoting can be numerically unstable when performed on matrices with increasing row norms
Higham (
2002
)
. This is equivalent to the problem of computing RQ factorization of a matrix whose column norms decrease significantly. Therefore, we suggest using LQ factorization if declining norm of snapshots is expected.
Remark 5
.
Initialization can also be done using SVD. If
X
=
U
вҖӢ
ОЈ
вҖӢ
V
вүҲ
U
k
вҖӢ
ОЈ
k
вҖӢ
V
k
X=U\Sigma V\approx U_{k}\Sigma_{k}V_{k}
where
k
k
is the numerical rank, then
Q
x
=
U
k
Q_{x}=U_{k}
,
T
=
ОЈ
k
T=\Sigma_{k}
and
Q
~
=
V
k
\widetilde{Q}=V_{k}
. Since
T
T
is diagonal it can be regarded as both upper and lower triangular matrix.
If the first factorization is the LQ, it can be transformed into the RQ at the beginning, and the streaming part will maintain the upper triangular form. A computation-free method is
to use the
r
x
Г—
r
x
r_{x}\times r_{x}
permutation matrix
О 
\Pi
that reverses the order and write
X
=
Q
x
вҖӢ
X
~
=
Q
x
вҖӢ
L
вҖӢ
Q
~
T
=
(
Q
x
вҖӢ
О 
)
вҖӢ
(
О 
T
вҖӢ
L
вҖӢ
О 
)
вҖӢ
(
О 
T
вҖӢ
Q
~
T
)
X=Q_{x}\widetilde{X}=Q_{x}L\widetilde{Q}^{T}=(Q_{x}\Pi)(\Pi^{T}L\Pi)(\Pi^{T}\widetilde{Q}^{T})
, where
R
=
О 
T
вҖӢ
L
вҖӢ
О 
R=\Pi^{T}L\Pi
is upper triangular. This reshuffles the columns of
Q
x
Q_{x}
, making this method less attractive because operations that involve possibly large dimensional
Q
x
Q_{x}
should be avoided.
8
8
8
One could make this permutation implicit and keep
Q
x
Q_{x}
as the pair
(
Q
x
,
О 
)
(Q_{x},\Pi)
, with the necessary adjustments when using it.
Therefore, the transformation from the LQ into the RQ form is preferably based on multiplications of
L
L
from the right using suitable orthogonal matrices. This can be done by a sequence of updates
L
=
L
вҖӢ
(
H
i
вҠ•
I
r
x
вҲ’
i
)
,
i
=
r
x
,
r
x
вҲ’
1
,
вҖҰ
вҖӢ
2
,
L=L(H_{i}\oplus I_{r_{x}-i}),\;\;i=r_{x},r_{x}-1,\ldots 2,
where
H
i
H_{i}
is the Householder reflector that transforms the last row of
L
(
1
:
i
,
1
:
i
)
L(1:i,1:i)
by annihilating
L
(
i
,
1
:
i
вҲ’
1
)
L(i,1:i-1)
.
The new procedure is summarized in Algorithm
6
.
We will use
рқҡӘ
вҖӢ
(
Оұ
i
,
Оұ
j
)
\mathbf{\Gamma}(\alpha_{i},\alpha_{j})
to denote the
2
Г—
2
2\times 2
Givens rotation matrix that when applied to vector
Оұ
=
(
Оұ
1
,
вҖҰ
,
Оұ
e
вҖӢ
n
вҖӢ
d
)
T
\alpha=(\alpha_{1},...,\alpha_{end})^{T}
nullifies
Оұ
j
\alpha_{j}
onto
Оұ
i
\alpha_{i}
. Algorithm
6
can be expanded so that
Q
x
,
y
Q_{x,y}
is updated as well. For simplicity we leave that out, but it is equivalent to procedure described in algorithm
3
. It is recommended to update
Q
x
,
y
Q_{x,y}
as well when
m
вү«
n
m\gg n
and when DMD eigenvalues and modes are calculated frequently.
Algorithm 5
[
G
y
,
q
,
T
G_{y,q},T
] =
updateYQT
(
G
y
,
q
,
T
,
x
~
,
y
~
,
Оі
x
,
Оі
y
,
tri
G_{y,q},T,\widetilde{x},\widetilde{y},\gamma_{x},\gamma_{y},\mathrm{tri}
)
0:
Matrices
G
y
,
q
,
T
G_{y,q},T
from (
20
); low-rank representation of new snapshots
x
~
,
y
~
\widetilde{x},\widetilde{y}
; nonnegative numbers
Оі
x
,
Оі
y
\gamma_{x},\gamma_{y}
as described in section
2.1
; character tri
вҲҲ
{
вҖҷUвҖҷ, вҖҷLвҖҷ
}
\in\{\texttt{'U', 'L'}\}
indicating whether
T
T
is upper or lower triangular;
0:
Updated matrices
G
y
,
q
,
T
G_{y,q},T
1:
if
Оі
x
>
0
\gamma_{x}>0
then
T
=
(
T
рқҹҺ
)
T=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}T\\
\mathbf{0}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
end
2:
if
Оі
y
>
0
\gamma_{y}>0
then
G
y
,
q
=
(
G
y
,
q
рқҹҺ
)
G_{y,q}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}G_{y,q}\\
\mathbf{0}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
end
3:
G
y
,
q
=
(
G
y
,
q
y
~
)
G_{y,q}=\begin{pmatrix}G_{y,q}&\widetilde{y}\end{pmatrix}
;
T
=
(
T
x
~
)
T=\begin{pmatrix}T&\widetilde{x}\end{pmatrix}
;
r
x
=
size
вҖӢ
(
T
,
1
)
r_{x}=\texttt{size}(T,1)
4:
if
tri
=
=
вҖҷLвҖҷ
then
5:
for
i
=
1
,
2
,
вҖҰ
,
r
x
вҲ’
1
i=1,2,...,r_{x}-1
do
6:
G
y
,
q
вҖӢ
(
:
,
[
i
вҖӢ
r
x
]
)
=
G
y
,
q
вҖӢ
(
:
,
[
i
вҖӢ
r
x
]
)
вҖӢ
рқҡӘ
вҖӢ
(
T
i
,
i
,
T
i
,
r
x
)
T
G_{y,q}(:,[i\ r_{x}])=G_{y,q}(:,[i\ r_{x}])\mathbf{\Gamma}\left(T_{i,i},T_{i,r_{x}}\right)^{T}
;
T
(
i
:
r
x
,
[
i
r
x
]
)
=
T
(
i
:
r
x
,
[
i
r
x
]
)
рқҡӘ
(
T
i
,
i
,
T
i
,
r
x
)
T
T(i:r_{x},[i\ r_{x}])=T(i:r_{x},[i\ r_{x}])\mathbf{\Gamma}\left(T_{i,i},T_{i,r_{x}}\right)^{T}
7:
end
for
8:
else
if
Оі
x
=
0
\gamma_{x}=0
then
9:
for
j
=
r
x
вҲ’
1
,
вҖҰ
,
2
,
1
j=r_{x}-1,...,2,1
do
10:
G
y
,
q
(
:
,
[
j
r
x
]
=
G
y
,
q
(
:
,
[
j
r
x
]
)
рқҡӘ
(
T
j
,
j
,
T
j
,
r
x
)
T
G_{y,q}(:,[j\ r_{x}]=G_{y,q}(:,[j\ r_{x}])\mathbf{\Gamma}\left(T_{j,j},T_{j,r_{x}}\right)^{T}
;
T
(
1
:
j
,
[
j
r
x
]
=
T
(
1
:
j
,
[
j
r
x
]
)
рқҡӘ
(
T
j
,
j
,
T
j
,
r
x
)
T
T(1:j,[j\ r_{x}]=T(1:j,[j\ r_{x}])\mathbf{\Gamma}\left(T_{j,j},T_{j,r_{x}}\right)^{T}
11:
end
for
12:
end
if
13:
if
Оі
x
=
0
\gamma_{x}=0
then
T
=
T
(
:
,
1
:
e
n
d
вҲ’
1
)
T=T(:,1:end-1)
;
G
y
,
q
=
G
y
,
q
(
:
,
1
:
e
n
d
вҲ’
1
)
G_{y,q}=G_{y,q}(:,1:end-1)
end
Algorithm 6
[
Q
x
,
Q
y
,
G
y
,
q
,
T
Q_{x},Q_{y},G_{y,q},T
] =
AddxyTQ
(
Q
x
,
Q
y
,
G
y
,
q
,
T
,
рқҗұ
,
рқҗІ
,
tol
,
1
tol
2
Q_{x},Q_{y},G_{y,q},T,\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y},\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2}
, tri)
0:
orthonormal
Q
x
,
Q
y
Q_{x},Q_{y}
from (
8
);
G
y
,
q
G_{y,q}
,
T
T
from (
20
); new data
рқҗұ
,
рқҗІ
\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}
; tolerances
tol
,
1
tol
,
2
tol
3
\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2},\texttt{tol}{}_{3}
; character tri
вҲҲ
{
вҖҷUвҖҷ, вҖҷLвҖҷ
}
\in\{\texttt{'U', 'L'}\}
indicating whether
T
T
is upper or lower triangular
0:
Updated matrices
Q
x
,
Q
y
,
G
y
,
q
,
T
Q_{x},Q_{y},G_{y,q},T
1:
[
рқҗӘ
x
,
x
~
,
Оі
x
]
[\mathbf{q}_{x},\widetilde{x},\gamma_{x}]
= GS_update(
Q
x
,
рқҗұ
,
tol
,
1
tol
2
Q_{x},\mathbf{x},\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2}
);
2:
[
рқҗӘ
y
,
y
~
,
Оі
y
]
[\mathbf{q}_{y},\widetilde{y},\gamma_{y}]
= GS_update(
Q
y
,
рқҗІ
,
tol
,
1
tol
2
Q_{y},\mathbf{y},\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2}
)
3:
if
Оі
x
>
0
\gamma_{x}>0
then
4:
Q
x
=
(
Q
x
рқҗӘ
x
)
Q_{x}=\begin{pmatrix}Q_{x}&\mathbf{q}_{x}\end{pmatrix}
;
x
~
=
(
x
~
Оі
x
)
\widetilde{x}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}\widetilde{x}\\
\gamma_{x}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
5:
end
if
6:
if
Оі
y
>
0
\gamma_{y}>0
then
7:
Q
y
=
(
Q
y
рқҗӘ
y
)
Q_{y}=\begin{pmatrix}Q_{y}&\mathbf{q}_{y}\end{pmatrix}
;
y
~
=
(
y
~
Оі
y
)
\widetilde{y}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}\widetilde{y}\\
\gamma_{y}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
8:
end
if
9:
[
G
y
,
q
,
T
]
=
updateYQT
вҖӢ
(
G
y
,
q
,
T
,
x
~
,
y
~
,
Оі
x
,
Оі
y
,
tri
)
[G_{y,q},T]=\texttt{updateYQT}(G_{y,q},T,\widetilde{x},\widetilde{y},\gamma_{x},\gamma_{y},\mathrm{tri})
3.1.3
Using updated Cholesky factors
The update described in Proposition
3.3
seems more expensive than the original update of
G
y
,
x
G_{y,x}
and
G
x
G_{x}
(see Algorithm
3
). It is not. Namely, applying
G
x
вҲ’
1
G_{x}^{-1}
requires Cholesky factorization (
O
вҖӢ
(
r
x
3
)
O(r_{x}^{3})
) and two triangular systems (
O
вҖӢ
(
r
x
2
вҖӢ
r
y
)
O(r_{x}^{2}r_{y})
). This motivates another, more efficient, approach: to keep updating the Cholesky factor of
G
x
G_{x}
.
This is done as follows. Let
G
x
+
g
x
вҖӢ
g
x
T
=
L
x
вҖӢ
L
x
T
G_{x}+g_{x}g_{x}^{T}=L_{x}L_{x}^{T}
. Then the updated Cholesky factor is
G
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
G
x
+
g
x
вҖӢ
g
x
T
g
x
вҖӢ
Оі
x
Оі
x
вҖӢ
g
x
T
Оі
x
2
)
=
(
L
x
рқҹҺ
b
x
T
ОІ
x
)
вҖӢ
(
L
x
T
b
x
рқҹҺ
ОІ
x
)
вҖӢ
with
вҖӢ
b
x
=
Оі
x
вҖӢ
L
x
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
g
x
,
ОІ
x
=
Оі
x
2
вҲ’
b
x
T
вҖӢ
b
x
,
G_{x,new}=\begin{pmatrix}G_{x}+g_{x}g_{x}^{T}&g_{x}\gamma_{x}\cr\gamma_{x}g_{x}^{T}&\gamma_{x}^{2}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}L_{x}&\mathbf{0}\cr b_{x}^{T}&\beta_{x}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}L_{x}^{T}&b_{x}\cr\mathbf{0}&\beta_{x}\end{pmatrix}\;\;\mbox{with}\;\;b_{x}=\gamma_{x}L_{x}^{-1}g_{x},\;\;\beta_{x}=\sqrt{\gamma_{x}^{2}-b_{x}^{T}b_{x}},
and the
O
вҖӢ
(
r
x
3
)
O(r_{x}^{3})
contribution to the cost (Line 2 in Algorithm
4
) can be replaced with
O
вҖӢ
(
r
x
2
)
O(r_{x}^{2})
. Note that this update may fail in finite precision computation if
G
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
G_{x,new}
is ill-conditioned. In other words, the problem of the squared condition numbers has not been removed. This makes the method proposed in В§
3.1.2
competitive: more numerical robustness is achieved with the same complexity. Computation of
L
x
L_{x}
from the Cholesky factor of
G
x
G_{x}
is outlined in В§
5.2
.
3.1.4
TQ based updates with enforced maximal ranks
It remains to adapt the new formulas to the upper limit
r
^
\widehat{r}
for the number of columns of
Q
x
Q_{x}
, as in section
2.1.2
. Here we do not have
G
x
G_{x}
, but we can use the orthogonal decomposition
X
вүҲ
Q
x
вҖӢ
T
вҖӢ
Q
~
T
X\approx Q_{x}T\widetilde{Q}^{T}
. It suffices to compute the SVD of
T
T
,
T
=
U
T
вҖӢ
ОЈ
T
вҖӢ
V
T
T
T=U_{T}\Sigma_{T}V_{T}^{T}
. Then
T
вүҲ
U
T
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
ОЈ
T
(
1
:
ПҒ
x
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
V
T
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
x
)
T
=
U
~
ПҒ
x
ОЈ
~
ПҒ
x
V
~
ПҒ
x
T\approx U_{T}(:,1\!:\!\rho_{x})\Sigma_{T}(1\!:\!\rho_{x},1\!:\!\rho_{x})V_{T}(:,1\!:\!\rho_{x})^{T}=\widetilde{U}_{\rho_{x}}\widetilde{\Sigma}_{\rho_{x}}\widetilde{V}_{\rho_{x}}
, where
ПҒ
x
\rho_{x}
is the new rank as in В§
2.1.2
. Since
X
=
(
Q
x
вҖӢ
U
T
)
вҖӢ
ОЈ
T
вҖӢ
(
Q
~
вҖӢ
V
T
)
T
X=(Q_{x}U_{T})\Sigma_{T}(\widetilde{Q}V_{T})^{T}
is the SVD, we have optimal low rank approximation
X
вүҲ
Q
x
вҖӢ
U
~
ПҒ
x
вҖӢ
ОЈ
~
ПҒ
x
вҖӢ
(
Q
~
вҖӢ
V
~
ПҒ
x
)
T
=
Q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
T
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
Q
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
,
where
вҖӢ
Q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
Q
x
вҖӢ
U
~
ПҒ
x
,
T
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
ОЈ
~
ПҒ
x
,
Q
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
Q
~
вҖӢ
V
~
ПҒ
x
.
X\approx Q_{x}\widetilde{U}_{\rho_{x}}\widetilde{\Sigma}_{\rho_{x}}(\widetilde{Q}\widetilde{V}_{\rho_{x}})^{T}=Q_{x,new}T_{new}\widetilde{Q}_{new}^{T},\;\;\mbox{where}\;\;Q_{x,new}=Q_{x}\widetilde{U}_{\rho_{x}},\;T_{new}=\widetilde{\Sigma}_{\rho_{x}},\;\widetilde{Q}_{new}=\widetilde{Q}\widetilde{V}_{\rho_{x}}.
Now
G
y
,
q
(
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
=
Y
~
вҖӢ
Q
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
Y
вҖӢ
Q
~
)
вҖӢ
V
~
ПҒ
x
=
G
y
,
q
вҖӢ
V
~
ПҒ
x
G_{y,q}^{(new)}=\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{Q}_{new}=(Y\widetilde{Q})\widetilde{V}_{\rho_{x}}=G_{y,q}\widetilde{V}_{\rho_{x}}
.
To enforce the upper limit
r
^
\widehat{r}
for the number of columns of
Q
y
Q_{y}
, we may proceed as before and keep updating the matrix
G
y
G_{y}
; see Remark
2
and Remark
3
. If squaring the condition number is to be avoided, then we can use the TQ decomposition of
Y
~
=
T
y
вҖӢ
Q
~
y
T
\widetilde{Y}=T_{y}\widetilde{Q}_{y}^{T}
. This requires
changing the global structure of the algorithm, in order to suppress the dimension
n
n
. To that end, using the TQ factorizations
X
~
=
T
x
вҖӢ
Q
~
x
T
\widetilde{X}=T_{x}\widetilde{Q}_{x}^{T}
and
Y
~
=
T
y
вҖӢ
Q
~
y
T
\widetilde{Y}=T_{y}\widetilde{Q}_{y}^{T}
, we rewrite (
20
) as
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
=
(
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
Q
y
)
вҖӢ
T
y
вҖӢ
(
Q
~
y
T
вҖӢ
Q
~
x
)
вҖӢ
T
x
вҲ’
1
,
Q_{x}^{T}AQ_{x}=(Q_{x}^{T}Q_{y})T_{y}(\widetilde{Q}_{y}^{T}\widetilde{Q}_{x})T_{x}^{-1},
(22)
where
T
y
вҲҲ
в„қ
r
y
Г—
r
y
T_{y}\in\mathbb{R}^{r_{y}\times r_{y}}
,
Q
~
y
T
вҖӢ
Q
~
x
вҲҲ
в„қ
r
y
Г—
r
x
\widetilde{Q}_{y}^{T}\widetilde{Q}_{x}\in\mathbb{R}^{r_{y}\times r_{x}}
and
T
x
вҲҲ
в„қ
r
x
Г—
r
x
T_{x}\in\mathbb{R}^{r_{x}\times r_{x}}
. Using the SVD
T
y
=
U
T
y
вҖӢ
ОЈ
T
y
вҖӢ
V
T
y
T
T_{y}=U_{T_{y}}\Sigma_{T_{y}}V_{T_{y}}^{T}
, we proceed as above with the approximation
Y
вүҲ
(
Q
y
U
T
y
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
y
)
)
ОЈ
T
y
(
1
:
ПҒ
y
,
1
:
ПҒ
y
)
(
Q
~
y
V
T
y
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
y
)
)
T
=
Q
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
Q
~
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
,
Y\approx(Q_{y}U_{T_{y}}(:,1\!:\!\rho_{y}))\Sigma_{T_{y}}(1\!:\!\rho_{y},1\!:\!\rho_{y})(\widetilde{Q}_{y}V_{T_{y}}(:,1\!:\!\rho_{y}))^{T}=Q_{y,new}T_{y,new}\widetilde{Q}_{y,new}^{T}\ ,
where
Q
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
Q
y
U
T
y
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
y
)
Q_{y,new}=Q_{y}U_{T_{y}}(:,1\!:\!\rho_{y})
,
T
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
ОЈ
T
y
(
1
:
ПҒ
y
,
1
:
ПҒ
y
)
T_{y,new}=\Sigma_{T_{y}}(1\!:\!\rho_{y},1\!:\!\rho_{y})
,
Q
~
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
Q
~
y
V
T
y
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
y
)
\widetilde{Q}_{y,new}=\widetilde{Q}_{y}V_{T_{y}}(:,1\!:\!\rho_{y})
.
Note that
Q
~
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\widetilde{Q}_{y,new}
is not computed. Instead, it suffices to update
Q
~
y
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
Q
~
x
=
V
T
y
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
y
)
(
Q
~
y
T
Q
~
x
)
\widetilde{Q}_{y,new}^{T}\widetilde{Q}_{x}=V_{T_{y}}(:,1\!:\!\rho_{y})(\widetilde{Q}_{y}^{T}\widetilde{Q}_{x})
.
Hence, in this version three (instead of two) вҖңsmallвҖқ matrices must be updated:
T
x
T_{x}
,
T
y
T_{y}
and
Q
~
y
,
x
=
Q
~
y
T
вҖӢ
Q
~
x
\widetilde{Q}_{y,x}=\widetilde{Q}_{y}^{T}\widetilde{Q}_{x}
.
3.1.5
Example - vorticity data from Example
2.1
To simulate working in single precision, we update
G
y
,
x
G_{y,x}
and
G
x
G_{x}
in double precision, but then round them to single precision after each update and before computing modes and predictions. The same thing is done to
L
L
and
Q
~
\widetilde{Q}
. The results are shown in figures
2
and
3
. In figure
2
, the algorithm starts from a batch of
n
0
=
15
n_{0}=15
snapshots. One snapshot is added then a prediction one step ahead is made, as outlined in В§
1.1.2
. The displayed results are obtained after adding
15
15
snapshots. In figure
3
two graphs show relative errors starting from a batch of
n
0
=
20
n_{0}=20
snapshots when making predictions (a) one step ahead and (b) five steps ahead using the original proposition (HWR-sDMD) with
G
x
G_{x}
and using TQ decomposition (TQ-sDMD), both in simulated single precision. For comparison, relative errors in double precision for HWR-sDMD are also depicted and coincide with errors for TQ-sDMD in simulated single precision
9
9
9
Relative errors of prediction using TQ-sDMD in double precision are omitted since they agree with the ones obtained when using single precision
.
Figure 2:
Comparison of predicted snapshots using the original algorithm HWR-sDMD (middle) and TQ-sDMD (using the LQ decomposition) (right). Left figure is the original snapshot at
n
=
31
n=31
.
The apparent differences in the prediction errors (
5.02e-5
vs.
3.78e-1
) show that TQ-sDMD has improved robustness
to ill-conditioning and finite precision roundoff errors. While HWR-sDMD has difficulties even for one step prediction, TQ-sDMD retains accuracy even for multiple steps, see figure
3
.
(a)
one step ahead
(b)
five steps ahead
Figure 3:
Relative error when predicting one or five steps ahead when updating
A
A
by using HWR-sDMD and TQ-sDMD and rounding to single precision before calling DMD, compared to updates by HWR-sDMD with calculation done entirely in double precision.
Here HWR-sDMD (64) denotes execution in the 64-bit double precision arithmetic.
3.2
Streaming DMD with Exact DMD vectors
An often used variation of the DMD is the Exact DMD
Tu
et al.
(
2014
)
, with the Exact DMD vectors, that are defined in the range of
Q
y
Q_{y}
вҖ”see Lines 4 and 8 in Algorithm
1
and the low rank representation (
8
) of
Y
Y
. In this section we show how to compute the Exact DMD vectors in the framework of the compressed streaming DMD
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
, using both the cross products (
19
) from
Hemati
et al.
(
2014
)
and the new compression from В§
3.1.2
, which avoids squaring the condition number of
X
~
\widetilde{X}
.
Proposition 3.4
.
Let
(
w
i
,
О»
i
)
(w_{i},\lambda_{i})
, be an eigenpair of
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
=
Q
x
,
y
вҖӢ
G
y
,
x
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
Q_{x}^{T}AQ_{x}=Q_{x,y}G_{y,x}G_{x}^{-1}
. Then the corresponding Exact DMD eigenvector is
рқҗі
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
G
y
,
x
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
w
i
,
\mathbf{z}_{i}^{(ex)}=Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{\dagger}w_{i}=Q_{y}G_{y,x}G_{x}^{-1}w_{i},
and we have
A
вҖӢ
рқҗі
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
=
О»
i
вҖӢ
рқҗі
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
A\mathbf{z}_{i}^{(ex)}=\lambda_{i}\mathbf{z}_{i}^{(ex)}
, where
A
=
Y
вҖӢ
X
вҖ 
A=YX^{\dagger}
. Hence, if
рқҗі
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
вү 
рқҹҺ
\mathbf{z}_{i}^{(ex)}\neq\mathbf{0}
then it is an eigenvector of
A
A
. In terms of the compression (
20
)
рқҗі
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
w
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
,
w
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
=
G
y
,
q
вҖӢ
T
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
w
i
.
\mathbf{z}_{i}^{(ex)}=Q_{y}w_{i}^{(ex)},\;\;\;w_{i}^{(ex)}=G_{y,q}T^{-1}w_{i}.
(23)
Proof.
The corresponding Ritz vector of the DMD matrix is
рқҗі
i
=
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
\mathbf{z}_{i}=Q_{x}w_{i}
. The Exact DMD vector is the result of one step of the power method (see
DrmaДҚ (
2024
)
) i.e.
рқҗі
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
=
Y
вҖӢ
X
вҖ 
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
вҖ 
вҖӢ
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
вҖӢ
(
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
)
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
w
i
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
G
y
,
x
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
w
i
,
\mathbf{z}_{i}^{(ex)}=YX^{\dagger}Q_{x}w_{i}=Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{\dagger}Q_{x}^{T}Q_{x}w_{i}=Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{\dagger}w_{i}=Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{T}(\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T})^{-1}w_{i}=Q_{y}G_{y,x}G_{x}^{-1}w_{i},
as claimed. Checking the formula (
23
), based on (
20
), is straightforward. Further,
Y
вҖӢ
X
вҖ 
вҖӢ
рқҗі
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
вҖ 
вҖӢ
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
=
О»
i
вҖӢ
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
=
О»
i
вҖӢ
рқҗі
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
.
(
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
=
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
=
О»
i
вҖӢ
w
i
)
.
YX^{\dagger}\mathbf{z}_{i}^{(ex)}=Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{\dagger}{Q_{x}^{T}Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{\dagger}w_{i}}=\lambda_{i}Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{\dagger}w_{i}=\lambda_{i}\mathbf{z}_{i}^{(ex)}.\;\;(Q_{x}^{T}Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{\dagger}w_{i}=Q_{x}^{T}AQ_{x}w_{i}=\lambda_{i}w_{i}).
вҲҺ
It is important to keep in mind that the
рқҗі
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
\mathbf{z}_{i}^{(ex)}
вҖҷs are exact eigenvectors only for the matrix
A
e
вҖӢ
x
=
Y
вҖӢ
X
вҖ 
A_{ex}=YX^{\dagger}
. Since
m
>
n
m>n
, the matrix that actually generated the data
X
X
,
Y
Y
is not uniquely determined, and the exactness for
A
e
вҖӢ
x
A_{ex}
does not imply exactness for the actual underlying operator. In that sense, calling these vectors
exact
would be a misnomer. However, the Exact DMD vectors can be used as alternative to the classical DMD eigenvectors. In the context of the (compressed) streaming DMD with low rank representations (
8
), considered here, these vectors have an interesting and useful advantage, which we describe next.
3.2.1
KMD with the Exact DMD vectors
Suppose that we want to perform the KMD analysis (В§
1.1.2
) of the last received snapshot
y
n
=
Y
вҖӢ
(
:
,
n
)
y_{n}=Y(:,n)
. (More generally, we might want to analyze certain number of most recent snapshots in order to make forecasting and to apply control.)
Consider the following two representations that must find the coefficients
Оұ
1
(
n
)
,
вҖҰ
,
Оұ
в„“
(
n
)
\alpha_{1}^{(n)},\ldots,\alpha_{\ell}^{(n)}
to minimize the least squares errors
вҖ–
y
n
вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
=
1
в„“
Оұ
i
(
n
)
вҖӢ
рқҗі
i
вҖ–
2
\displaystyle\!\!\!\!\!\!\!\|y_{n}-\sum_{i=1}^{\ell}\alpha_{i}^{(n)}\mathbf{z}_{i}\|_{2}\!\!
=
\displaystyle=
вҖ–
Q
y
вҖӢ
y
~
n
вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
=
1
в„“
Оұ
i
(
n
)
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
вҖ–
2
вҖӢ
or
\displaystyle\!\!\|Q_{y}\widetilde{y}_{n}-\sum_{i=1}^{\ell}\alpha_{i}^{(n)}Q_{x}w_{i}\|_{2}\;\;\mbox{or}
(24)
вҖ–
y
n
вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
=
1
в„“
Оұ
i
(
n
)
вҖӢ
рқҗі
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
вҖ–
2
\displaystyle\!\!\!\!\!\!\!\|y_{n}-\sum_{i=1}^{\ell}\alpha_{i}^{(n)}\mathbf{z}_{i}^{(ex)}\|_{2}\!\!
=
\displaystyle=
вҖ–
Q
y
вҖӢ
y
~
n
вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
=
1
в„“
Оұ
i
(
n
)
вҖӢ
Q
y
вҖӢ
w
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
вҖ–
2
=
вҖ–
y
~
n
вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
=
1
в„“
Оұ
i
(
n
)
вҖӢ
w
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
вҖ–
2
.
\displaystyle\!\!\|Q_{y}\widetilde{y}_{n}-\sum_{i=1}^{\ell}\alpha_{i}^{(n)}Q_{y}w_{i}^{(ex)}\|_{2}=\|\widetilde{y}_{n}-\sum_{i=1}^{\ell}\alpha_{i}^{(n)}w_{i}^{(ex)}\|_{2}.
(25)
In (
24
) the dimension of the problem is
m
Г—
в„“
m\times\ell
, and in (
25
) the invariance of the Euclidean norm under orthogonal transformations reduces the problem to
r
y
Г—
в„“
r_{y}\times\ell
. In other words, KMD can be performed in the low rank representation of the data.
Similarly, in the case of single trajectory (
y
i
=
x
i
+
1
y_{i}=x_{i+1}
) if the reconstruction (
7
) includes
y
n
y_{n}
, then dropping the first snapshot we have
(using
рқҗІ
i
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
y
~
i
\mathbf{y}_{i}=Q_{y}\widetilde{y}_{i}
,
рқҗі
j
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
w
j
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
\mathbf{z}_{j}^{(ex)}=Q_{y}w_{j}^{(ex)}
and the unitary invariance of the norm)
вҲ‘
i
=
1
n
w
i
2
вҖӢ
вҖ–
рқҗІ
i
вҲ’
вҲ‘
j
=
1
в„“
рқҗі
ПӮ
j
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
вҖӢ
Оұ
j
вҖӢ
О»
ПӮ
j
i
вҲ’
1
вҖ–
2
2
=
вҲ‘
i
=
1
n
w
i
2
вҖӢ
вҖ–
y
~
i
вҲ’
вҲ‘
j
=
1
в„“
w
ПӮ
j
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
вҖӢ
Оұ
j
вҖӢ
О»
ПӮ
j
i
вҲ’
1
вҖ–
2
2
вҹ¶
min
Оұ
j
.
\sum_{i=1}^{n}w_{i}^{2}\|\mathbf{y}_{i}-\sum_{j=1}^{\ell}\mathbf{z}_{\varsigma_{j}}^{(ex)}\alpha_{j}\lambda_{\varsigma_{j}}^{i-1}\|_{2}^{2}=\sum_{i=1}^{n}w_{i}^{2}\|\widetilde{y}_{i}-\sum_{j=1}^{\ell}w_{\varsigma_{j}}^{(ex)}\alpha_{j}\lambda_{\varsigma_{j}}^{i-1}\|_{2}^{2}\longrightarrow\min_{\alpha_{j}}.
With the DMD vectors
рқҗі
i
=
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
\mathbf{z}_{i}=Q_{x}w_{i}
, this reduction of the dimension of the least squares problem is not possible because the involved vectors are represented in two bases; see (
24
). This reduction into a smaller subspace can significantly reduce computation time as will be shown later in figure
5
.
3.3
Discussion and need for further improvements
The introduction of the Exact DMD vectors and the discussion of the KMD in В§
3.2
raise an important practical issue.
That is, keeping two separate bases
Q
x
Q_{x}
and
Q
y
Q_{y}
contains an unnecessary overhead that increases the memory footprint of the algorithm and its computational complexity.
This is particularly apparent in the case of the data from a single log trajectory. In the single trajectory setting,
рқҗұ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
Y
вҖӢ
(
:
,
e
вҖӢ
n
вҖӢ
d
)
\mathbf{x}_{new}=Y(:,end)
and
рқҗІ
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\mathbf{y}_{new}
is the new received snapshot. Note that
Y
вҖӢ
(
:
,
e
вҖӢ
n
вҖӢ
d
)
Y(:,end)
has representation in the basis
Q
y
Q_{y}
, and the updating procedure requires its representation in the
Q
x
Q_{x}
вҖ“basis. This means that each vector is processed twice.
Moreover, trajectory with
n
n
pairs
(
рқҗұ
i
,
рқҗІ
i
вүЎ
рқҗұ
i
+
1
)
(\mathbf{x}_{i},\mathbf{y}_{i}\equiv\mathbf{x}_{i+1})
contains
n
+
1
n+1
vectors and yet two
m
Г—
n
m\times n
orthonormal matrices are computed to represent them. Clearly, the ranges of
Q
x
Q_{x}
and
Q
y
Q_{y}
must have large intersection вҖ“ it is of dimension (at most)
n
вҲ’
1
n-1
. Maintaining two orthonormal bases for the ranges of
X
X
and
Y
Y
is not optimal, in particular in large scale out-of-core computations, and in fact it is not necessary.
As discussed in В§
1.1.1
, the residuals (
6
) provide information on the quality of the approximate eigenpairs and should be returned together with the computed Ritz pairs. Using all computed eigenpairs in the KMD (В§
1.1.2
), including those with large residuals, precludes correct identification of coherent structures and induces large error if the KMD is used for forecasting.
In this framework the residuals can be computed using (
10
) as
вҖ–
r
i
вҖ–
2
\|r_{i}\|_{2}
, where
r
i
=
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
=
рқҗі
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
.
r_{i}=AQ_{x}w_{i}-\lambda_{i}Q_{x}w_{i}=Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{\dagger}w_{i}-\lambda_{i}Q_{x}w_{i}=\mathbf{z}_{i}^{(ex)}-\lambda_{i}Q_{x}w_{i}.
(26)
This requires lifting the vectors into the
m
m
вҖ“dimensional space, which makes computation of the residuals expensive, even in out-of-core computation for extremely large dimensions.
Other functionalities of an on-line streaming data processing are of interest.
For example, to capture changes in short-term dynamics, DMD based analysis must be flexible and allow for dynamically varying data window that also includes discarding oldest data (single snapshot or a block of snapshots). Removing
в„“
\ell
oldest snapshot pairs is in batched processing fairly simple:
X
~
\widetilde{X}
,
Y
~
\widetilde{Y}
are simply updated by
X
~
вҶҗ
X
~
(
:
,
в„“
+
1
:
e
n
d
)
\widetilde{X}\leftarrow\widetilde{X}(:,\ell+1:end)
and
Y
~
вҶҗ
Y
~
(
:
,
в„“
+
1
:
e
n
d
)
\widetilde{Y}\leftarrow\widetilde{Y}(:,\ell+1:end)
, respectively.
This may change the ranks of
X
~
\widetilde{X}
,
Y
~
\widetilde{Y}
. A technical difficulty arises if the matrices are used in the crossвҖ“products
G
x
=
X
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
G_{x}=\widetilde{X}\widetilde{X}^{T}
,
G
y
,
x
=
Y
~
вҖӢ
X
~
T
G_{y,x}=\widetilde{Y}\widetilde{X}^{T}
. Namely, the update
G
x
вҶҗ
G
x
вҲ’
X
~
(
:
,
1
:
в„“
)
X
~
(
:
,
1
:
в„“
)
T
G_{x}\leftarrow G_{x}-\widetilde{X}(:,1:\ell)\widetilde{X}(:,1:\ell)^{T}
is simply not feasible because all information on individual snapshots is blended into the cross products
G
x
,
G
y
G_{x},G_{y}
and
G
y
,
x
G_{y,x}
. This limits the functionality of the application; it is impossible to gradually keep forgetting the oldest data or simply resize the active window by truncating all but a few most recent snapshots.
We address these questions in a separate work.
4
One basis low-rank sDMD
Consider a sequence of data snapshots
рқҗ¬
1
,
рқҗ¬
2
,
вҖҰ
,
рқҗ¬
n
,
рқҗ¬
n
+
1
\mathbf{s}_{1},\mathbf{s}_{2},\ldots,\mathbf{s}_{n},\mathbf{s}_{n+1}
from a single long trajectory, so that
рқҗұ
i
=
рқҗ¬
i
\mathbf{x}_{i}=\mathbf{s}_{i}
,
рқҗІ
i
=
рқҗ¬
i
+
1
\mathbf{y}_{i}=\mathbf{s}_{i+1}
for all
i
i
, i.e.
X
=
S
(
:
,
1
:
n
)
X=S(:,1:n)
and
Y
=
S
(
:
,
2
:
n
+
1
)
Y=S(:,2:n+1)
. In the same way as in В§
2
, the data matrix
S
=
(
рқҗ¬
1
вҖӢ
вҖҰ
вҖӢ
рқҗ¬
n
+
1
)
S=(\mathbf{s}_{1}\ \ldots\ \mathbf{s}_{n+1})
can be written in a low-rank factored form
S
=
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
,
Q
вҲҲ
в„қ
m
Г—
r
,
S
~
вҲҲ
в„қ
r
Г—
(
n
+
1
)
.
S=Q\widetilde{S},\quad Q\in\mathbb{R}^{m\times r},\;\;\widetilde{S}\in\mathbb{R}^{r\times(n+1)}.
(27)
If this factorization is computed from scratch, i.e. in the streaming mode from the very first snapshot, then
initially
S
~
11
=
вҖ–
рқҗ¬
1
вҖ–
2
\widetilde{S}_{11}=\|\mathbf{s}_{1}\|_{2}
,
Q
вҖӢ
(
:
,
1
)
=
рқҗ¬
1
/
S
~
11
Q(:,1)=\mathbf{s}_{1}/\widetilde{S}_{11}
, and the updating procedures
from В§
2
apply. The matrix
S
S
will have an upper-staircase structure that depends on whether the new added snapshot adds new dimension and a new column of
Q
Q
. We illustrate a few scenarios in the simple case of
n
=
5
n=5
:
S
=
(
q
1
q
2
q
3
q
4
q
5
q
6
)
вҖӢ
(
вҠӣ
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
вҠӣ
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
вҠӣ
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
0
вҠӣ
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
0
0
вҠӣ
вҲ—
0
0
0
0
0
вҠӣ
)
,
S
=
(
q
1
q
2
q
3
q
4
)
вҖӢ
(
вҠӣ
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
вҠӣ
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
0
вҠӣ
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
0
0
0
вҠӣ
)
,
S
=
(
q
1
q
2
q
3
)
вҖӢ
(
вҠӣ
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
вҠӣ
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
0
вҠӣ
вҲ—
вҲ—
)
.
S=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}q_{1}&q_{2}&q_{3}&q_{4}&q_{5}&q_{6}\end{smallmatrix}\right)\left(\begin{smallmatrix}\circledast&*&*&*&*&*\cr 0&\circledast&*&*&*&*\cr 0&0&\circledast&*&*&*\cr 0&0&0&\circledast&*&*\cr 0&0&0&0&\circledast&*\cr 0&0&0&0&0&\circledast\cr\end{smallmatrix}\right),\;S=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}q_{1}&q_{2}&q_{3}&q_{4}\end{smallmatrix}\right)\left(\begin{smallmatrix}\circledast&*&*&*&*&*\cr 0&\circledast&*&*&*&*\cr 0&0&0&\circledast&*&*\cr 0&0&0&0&0&\circledast\end{smallmatrix}\right),\;S=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}q_{1}&q_{2}&q_{3}\end{smallmatrix}\right)\left(\begin{smallmatrix}\circledast&*&*&*&*&*\cr 0&\circledast&*&*&*&*\cr 0&0&0&\circledast&*&*\end{smallmatrix}\right).
If in the initial step a batch of snapshot becomes available, it is important for compression of
A
A
to first perform rank-revealing factorization of
X
X
and then extend the rank-revealing factorization by
рқҗІ
=
Y
вҖӢ
(
:
,
e
вҖӢ
n
вҖӢ
d
)
\mathbf{y}=Y(:,end)
to obtain rank revealing factorization of
S
=
(
X
вҖӢ
рқҗІ
)
=
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
S=(X\ \mathbf{y})=Q\widetilde{S}
. In this way, orthogonal basis for
X
X
is easily separated from orthogonal basis for
S
S
. Extension for
рқҗІ
\mathbf{y}
is done using Gram-Schmid (re)orthogonalization. Visually, for a starting batch of
4
4
snapshots and after two new snapshots obtained, a few scenarios for
S
S
are
S
=
(
q
1
q
2
q
3
q
4
q
5
q
6
)
вҖӢ
(
+
+
+
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
+
+
+
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
+
+
+
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
0
вҠӣ
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
0
0
вҠӣ
вҲ—
0
0
0
0
0
вҠӣ
)
,
S
=
(
q
1
q
2
q
3
q
4
)
вҖӢ
(
+
+
+
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
+
+
+
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
+
+
+
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
0
0
0
вҠӣ
)
,
S
=
(
q
1
q
2
q
3
)
вҖӢ
(
+
+
+
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
+
+
+
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
+
+
+
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
)
.
S=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}q_{1}&q_{2}&q_{3}&q_{4}&q_{5}&q_{6}\end{smallmatrix}\right)\left(\begin{smallmatrix}+&+&+&*&*&*\cr+&+&+&*&*&*\cr+&+&+&*&*&*\cr 0&0&0&\circledast&*&*\cr 0&0&0&0&\circledast&*\cr 0&0&0&0&0&\circledast\cr\end{smallmatrix}\right),\;S=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}q_{1}&q_{2}&q_{3}&q_{4}\end{smallmatrix}\right)\left(\begin{smallmatrix}+&+&+&*&*&*\cr+&+&+&*&*&*\cr+&+&+&*&*&*\cr 0&0&0&0&0&\circledast\end{smallmatrix}\right),\;S=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}q_{1}&q_{2}&q_{3}\end{smallmatrix}\right)\left(\begin{smallmatrix}+&+&+&*&*&*\cr+&+&+&*&*&*\cr+&+&+&*&*&*\end{smallmatrix}\right).
4.1
Low rank snapshots вҖ“ change of basis
The factorization (
27
) is built вҖңon the flyвҖқ by processing incoming snapshots and, unlike the method from В§
2
, it requires only one orthonormal basis. It implicitly contains (potentially low-rank) representations analogous to (
8
):
X
=
Q
S
~
x
,
with
S
~
x
=
S
~
(
1
:
r
,
1
:
n
)
,
and
Y
=
Q
S
~
y
,
S
~
y
=
S
~
(
1
:
r
,
2
:
n
+
1
)
.
X=Q\widetilde{S}_{x},\;\mbox{with}\;\widetilde{S}_{x}=\widetilde{S}(1:r,1:n),\;\mbox{and}\;Y=Q\widetilde{S}_{y},\;\widetilde{S}_{y}=\widetilde{S}(1:r,2:n+1).
(28)
Even in the full-rank case (
r
=
n
+
1
r=n+1
), the dimension reduction may be substantial in large dimensional simulations with
m
вү«
n
m\gg n
.
Working with
S
~
\widetilde{S}
instead of
S
S
can be viewed as a change of basis. This is best seen in the formulation via the Exact DMD matrix
Y
вҖӢ
X
вҖ 
=
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
~
x
вҖ 
вҖӢ
Q
T
YX^{\dagger}=Q\widetilde{S}_{y}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{\dagger}Q^{T}
, with the Rayleigh quotient
Q
T
вҖӢ
(
Y
вҖӢ
X
вҖ 
)
вҖӢ
Q
=
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
~
x
вҖ 
Q^{T}(YX^{\dagger})Q=\widetilde{S}_{y}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{\dagger}
.
In general, for any DMD matrix
10
10
10
Recall В§
1.1
.
A
A
,
A
вҖӢ
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
x
=
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
y
вҖӢ
P
в„ӣ
вҖӢ
(
X
T
)
=
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
~
x
T
вҖӢ
(
S
~
x
T
)
вҖ 
,
AQ\widetilde{S}_{x}=Q\widetilde{S}_{y}P_{\mathcal{R}(X^{T})}=Q\widetilde{S}_{y}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{T}(\widetilde{S}_{x}^{T})^{\dagger},
(29)
where we have to read this relation carefully. Namely, the action of
A
A
is defined by the data only on the range of
X
X
. Since the factorization (
27
) does not assume full rank of
S
~
x
\widetilde{S}_{x}
, the rank
r
r
and the structure of
S
S
are determined during the computation. Depending on the last processed snapshot, the last row of
S
~
x
\widetilde{S}_{x}
can be zero or non-zero.
If the last row of
S
~
x
\widetilde{S}_{x}
is nonzero, then
range
вҖӢ
(
Q
)
=
range
вҖӢ
(
X
)
\mathrm{range}(Q)=\mathrm{range}(X)
,
S
~
x
\widetilde{S}_{x}
is of full row rank,
A
вҖӢ
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
x
AQ\widetilde{S}_{x}
is defined by the data and
A
вҖӢ
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
x
вҖӢ
S
~
x
T
=
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
~
x
T
AQ\widetilde{S}_{x}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{T}=Q\widetilde{S}_{y}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{T}
,
A
вҖӢ
Q
=
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
~
x
T
вҖӢ
(
S
~
x
вҖӢ
S
~
x
T
)
вҲ’
1
AQ=Q\widetilde{S}_{y}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{T}(\widetilde{S}_{x}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{T})^{-1}
. The Rayleigh quotient reads
Q
T
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
Q
=
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
~
x
вҖ 
=
(
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
~
x
T
)
вҖӢ
(
S
~
x
вҖӢ
S
~
x
T
)
вҲ’
1
,
Q^{T}AQ=\widetilde{S}_{y}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{\dagger}=(\widetilde{S}_{y}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{T})(\widetilde{S}_{x}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{T})^{-1},
(30)
and each eigenpair
(
О»
,
w
)
(\lambda,w)
of
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
~
x
вҖ 
\widetilde{S}_{y}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{\dagger}
yields the corresponding Ritz pair
(
О»
,
Q
вҖӢ
w
)
(\lambda,Qw)
.
If the last row of
S
~
x
\widetilde{S}_{x}
is zero, then
range
(
Q
)
вҠӢ
range
(
X
)
=
range
(
Q
(
:
,
1
:
r
вҲ’
1
)
)
\mathrm{range}(Q)\supsetneq\mathrm{range}(X)=\mathrm{range}(Q(:,1:r-1))
. In that case,
S
~
x
=
(
S
^
x
рқҹҺ
)
\widetilde{S}_{x}=\begin{pmatrix}\widehat{S}_{x}\cr\mathbf{0}\end{pmatrix}
, where
S
^
x
\widehat{S}_{x}
is of full row rank. Further,
A
Q
S
~
x
=
A
Q
(
:
,
1
:
r
вҲ’
1
)
S
^
x
AQ\widetilde{S}_{x}=AQ(:,1:r-1)\widehat{S}_{x}
, and
S
~
x
вҖ 
=
(
S
^
x
вҖ 
рқҹҺ
)
,
(
S
~
x
вҖӢ
S
~
x
T
)
вҖ 
=
(
(
S
^
x
вҖӢ
S
^
x
T
)
вҲ’
1
рқҹҺ
рқҹҺ
0
)
.
\widetilde{S}_{x}^{\dagger}=\begin{pmatrix}\widehat{S}_{x}^{\dagger}&\mathbf{0}\end{pmatrix},\;\;(\widetilde{S}_{x}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{T})^{\dagger}=\begin{pmatrix}(\widehat{S}_{x}\widehat{S}_{x}^{T})^{-1}&\mathbf{0}\cr\mathbf{0}&0\end{pmatrix}.
In this case, from (
29
) we have (instead of (
30
))
A
вҖӢ
Q
вҖӢ
(
S
^
x
рқҹҺ
)
вҖӢ
(
S
^
x
T
рқҹҺ
)
\displaystyle AQ\begin{pmatrix}\widehat{S}_{x}\cr\mathbf{0}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}\widehat{S}_{x}^{T}&\mathbf{0}\end{pmatrix}
=
\displaystyle=
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
y
вҖӢ
(
S
^
x
T
рқҹҺ
)
вҖӢ
(
S
^
x
T
вҒЈ
вҖ 
рқҹҺ
)
вҖӢ
(
S
^
x
T
рқҹҺ
)
=
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
y
вҖӢ
(
S
^
x
T
рқҹҺ
)
,
\displaystyle Q\widetilde{S}_{y}\begin{pmatrix}\widehat{S}_{x}^{T}&\mathbf{0}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}\widehat{S}_{x}^{T\dagger}\cr\mathbf{0}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}\widehat{S}_{x}^{T}&\mathbf{0}\end{pmatrix}=Q\widetilde{S}_{y}\begin{pmatrix}\widehat{S}_{x}^{T}&\mathbf{0}\end{pmatrix},
A
вҖӢ
Q
вҖӢ
(
I
r
вҲ’
1
рқҹҺ
рқҹҺ
0
)
\displaystyle AQ\begin{pmatrix}I_{r-1}&\mathbf{0}\cr\mathbf{0}&0\end{pmatrix}
=
\displaystyle=
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
y
вҖӢ
(
S
^
x
T
вҖӢ
(
S
^
x
вҖӢ
S
^
x
T
)
вҲ’
1
рқҹҺ
)
.
\displaystyle Q\widetilde{S}_{y}\begin{pmatrix}\widehat{S}_{x}^{T}(\widehat{S}_{x}\widehat{S}_{x}^{T})^{-1}&\mathbf{0}\end{pmatrix}.
Only
A
Q
(
:
,
1
:
r
вҲ’
1
)
AQ(:,1:r-1)
is given by the data,
A
Q
(
:
,
1
:
r
вҲ’
1
)
=
Q
S
~
y
S
^
x
T
(
S
^
x
S
^
x
T
)
вҲ’
1
AQ(:,1:r-1)=Q\widetilde{S}_{y}\widehat{S}_{x}^{T}(\widehat{S}_{x}\widehat{S}_{x}^{T})^{-1}
, and it is natural to take the test space as the range of
Q
(
:
,
1
:
r
вҲ’
1
)
Q(:,1:r-1)
and the Rayleigh
quotient
Q
(
:
,
1
:
r
вҲ’
1
)
T
A
Q
(
:
,
1
:
r
вҲ’
1
)
=
Q
(
:
,
1
:
r
вҲ’
1
)
T
Q
S
~
y
S
^
x
T
(
S
^
x
S
^
x
T
)
вҲ’
1
=
S
~
y
(
1
:
r
вҲ’
1
,
:
)
S
^
x
T
(
S
^
x
S
^
x
T
)
вҲ’
1
.
Q(:,1:r-1)^{T}AQ(:,1:r-1)=Q(:,1:r-1)^{T}Q\widetilde{S}_{y}\widehat{S}_{x}^{T}(\widehat{S}_{x}\widehat{S}_{x}^{T})^{-1}=\widetilde{S}_{y}(1:r-1,:)\widehat{S}_{x}^{T}(\widehat{S}_{x}\widehat{S}_{x}^{T})^{-1}.
(31)
Each eigenpair
(
О»
,
w
^
)
(\lambda,\widehat{w})
of (
31
) yields the corresponding Ritz pair
(
О»
,
Q
вҖӢ
w
)
(\lambda,Qw)
with
w
=
(
w
^
рқҹҺ
)
w=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}\widehat{w}\cr\mathbf{0}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
.
Further on,
Q
x
Q_{x}
will denote the orthonormal basis of
X
X
. It is equal to
Q
x
=
Q
(
:
,
1
:
r
вҲ’
1
)
Q_{x}=Q(:,1:r-1)
if the last row of
S
~
x
\widetilde{S}_{x}
is zero, or
Q
x
=
Q
Q_{x}=Q
if the last row is non-zero. Notation
S
ВҜ
x
\overline{S}_{x}
will be used to denote the non-zero rows of
S
~
x
\widetilde{S}_{x}
(i.e.
S
ВҜ
x
=
S
~
x
\overline{S}_{x}=\widetilde{S}_{x}
if the last row is non-zero, and
S
ВҜ
x
=
S
~
x
(
1
:
r
вҲ’
1
,
:
)
\overline{S}_{x}=\widetilde{S}_{x}(1:r-1,:)
otherwise). The notation
G
y
,
x
G_{y,x}
and
G
x
G_{x}
from (
12
) will be "reused" to denote the sum of cross products of snapshots in lower dimension, i.e.
G
y
,
x
=
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
ВҜ
x
T
G_{y,x}=\widetilde{S}_{y}\overline{S}_{x}^{T}
and
G
x
=
S
ВҜ
x
вҖӢ
S
ВҜ
x
T
G_{x}=\overline{S}_{x}\overline{S}_{x}^{T}
. The DMD algorithm for one-basis version of streaming DMD is given below.
Algorithm 7
[
Z
,
Оӣ
]
[Z,\Lambda]
=
DMD_one_basis
(
Q
,
G
y
,
x
,
G
x
Q,G_{y,x},G_{x}
)
0:
orthonormal
Q
Q
from (
27
); cross product matrices
G
y
,
x
,
G
x
G_{y,x},G_{x}
1:
r
x
=
size
вҖӢ
(
G
x
,
1
)
r_{x}=\texttt{size}(G_{x},1)
;
B
=
G
y
,
x
(
1
:
r
x
,
:
)
G
x
вҲ’
1
B=G_{y,x}(1:r_{x},:)G_{x}^{-1}
;
2:
[
W
,
Оӣ
]
=
eig
вҖӢ
(
B
)
[W,\Lambda]=\texttt{eig}(B)
;
3:
Z
=
Q
(
:
,
1
:
r
x
)
W
Z=Q(:,1:r_{x})W
.
3:
Z
Z
,
Оӣ
\Lambda
.
Remark 6
.
If
(
S
~
x
,
S
~
y
)
(\widetilde{S}_{x},\widetilde{S}_{y})
, where the last row of
S
~
x
\widetilde{S}_{x}
is zero, is forwarded to Algorithm
1
, then the matrix of the dominant left singular vectors (corresponding to the nonzero singular values) of
S
~
x
\widetilde{S}_{x}
has the last row zero and the computed eigenvectors are of the form
w
=
(
w
^
рқҹҺ
)
w=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}\widehat{w}\cr\mathbf{0}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
. The formulations (
30
), (
31
) are in the spirit of В§
2
, tailored for large number of high-dimensional low rank data.
4.1.1
TQ decomposition
It is again possible to introduce TQ decomposition of
S
ВҜ
x
\overline{S}_{x}
to avoid the squaring of the condition number. With
r
x
r_{x}
denoting the number of columns in
Q
x
Q_{x}
, in both (
30
) and (
31
), it holds that the Rayleigh-Ritz matrix is equal to
Q
x
T
A
Q
x
=
S
~
y
(
1
:
r
x
,
:
)
S
ВҜ
x
вҖ 
Q_{x}^{T}AQ_{x}=\widetilde{S}_{y}(1:r_{x},:)\overline{S}_{x}^{\dagger}
. If
S
ВҜ
x
=
T
вҖӢ
Q
~
T
\overline{S}_{x}=T\widetilde{Q}^{T}
is the TQ decomposition of
S
ВҜ
x
\overline{S}_{x}
, and
G
y
,
q
=
S
~
y
вҖӢ
Q
~
G_{y,q}=\widetilde{S}_{y}\widetilde{Q}
, then
Q
x
T
A
Q
x
=
G
y
,
q
(
1
:
r
x
,
:
)
T
вҲ’
1
Q_{x}^{T}AQ_{x}=G_{y,q}(1:r_{x},:)T^{-1}
. Algorithm
7
can be called as
[
Z
,
Оӣ
]
=
DMD_one_basis
вҖӢ
(
Q
,
G
y
,
q
,
T
)
[Z,\Lambda]=\texttt{DMD\_one\_basis}(Q,G_{y,q},T)
.
4.2
The Exact DMD vectors and the residuals
The scheme outlined in В§
4.1
addresses the problem of keeping two separate bases, as discussed in
В§
3.3
. Another important issue raised in В§
3.3
are computation of the residuals, the Exact DMD vectors and the KMD. The following assertions are analogous to Proposition
3.4
.
Proposition 4.1
.
Let
(
О»
i
,
w
i
)
(\lambda_{i},w_{i})
, be an eigenpair of
Q
x
T
A
Q
x
=
G
y
,
x
(
1
:
r
x
,
1
:
r
x
)
G
x
(
1
:
r
x
,
1
:
r
x
)
вҲ’
1
=
G
ВҜ
y
,
x
G
ВҜ
x
вҲ’
1
Q_{x}^{T}AQ_{x}=G_{y,x}(1\!\!:\!\!r_{x},1\!\!:\!\!r_{x})G_{x}(1\!\!:\!\!r_{x},1\!\!:\!\!r_{x})^{-1}=\overline{G}_{y,x}\overline{G}_{x}^{-1}
where
r
x
r_{x}
is the rank of
X
X
. Then the corresponding Exact DMD eigenvector is
рқҗі
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
=
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
~
x
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
=
Q
вҖӢ
G
ВҜ
y
,
x
вҖӢ
G
ВҜ
x
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
,
\mathbf{z}_{i}^{(ex)}=Q\widetilde{S}_{y}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{\dagger}w_{i}=Q\overline{G}_{y,x}\overline{G}_{x}^{\dagger}w_{i},
and
A
вҖӢ
рқҗі
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
=
О»
i
вҖӢ
рқҗі
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
A\mathbf{z}_{i}^{(ex)}=\lambda_{i}\mathbf{z}_{i}^{(ex)}
, where
A
=
Y
вҖӢ
X
вҖ 
A=YX^{\dagger}
. Hence, if
рқҗі
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
вү 
рқҹҺ
\mathbf{z}_{i}^{(ex)}\neq\mathbf{0}
then it is an eigenvector of
A
A
.
Consider now the residuals. The residual
r
i
r_{i}
of Ritz pair
(
О»
i
,
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
)
(\lambda_{i},Q_{x}w_{i})
is equal to
r
i
=
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
=
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
ВҜ
вҖӢ
x
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
=
z
i
(
e
вҖӢ
x
)
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
.
r_{i}=AQ_{x}w_{i}-\lambda_{i}Q_{x}w_{i}=Q\widetilde{S}_{y}\overline{S}x^{\dagger}w_{i}-\lambda_{i}Q_{x}w_{i}=z_{i}^{(ex)}-\lambda_{i}Q_{x}w_{i}.
(32)
When a new snapshot does not expand the orthogonal basis for
S
S
(
Q
=
Q
x
Q=Q_{x}
), the subspace spanned by
X
X
is invariant for the current DMD matrix
A
A
since
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
=
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
~
x
вҖ 
Q_{x}^{T}AQ_{x}=\widetilde{S}_{y}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{\dagger}
and
r
i
=
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
=
Q
x
вҖӢ
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
~
x
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
вҲ’
Q
x
вҖӢ
(
О»
i
вҖӢ
w
i
)
=
Q
x
вҖӢ
(
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
w
i
)
=
рқҹҺ
.
r_{i}=AQ_{x}w_{i}-\lambda_{i}Q_{x}w_{i}=Q_{x}\widetilde{S}_{y}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{\dagger}w_{i}-Q_{x}(\lambda_{i}w_{i})=Q_{x}(Q_{x}^{T}AQ_{x}w_{i}-\lambda_{i}w_{i})=\mathbf{0}.
If
Q
=
(
Q
x
q
)
Q=(Q_{x}\ \ q)
then, in a similar way,
r
i
=
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
^
x
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
Q
вҖӢ
(
w
i
0
)
=
Q
вҖӢ
(
S
~
y
(
1
:
r
вҲ’
1
,
:
)
S
^
x
вҖ 
w
i
вҲ’
О»
i
w
i
S
~
y
вҖӢ
(
r
,
:
)
вҖӢ
S
^
x
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
)
=
Q
вҖӢ
(
рқҹҺ
y
~
r
вҖӢ
S
^
x
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
)
,
r_{i}=Q\widetilde{S}_{y}\widehat{S}_{x}^{\dagger}w_{i}-\lambda_{i}Q\left(\begin{smallmatrix}w_{i}\\
0\end{smallmatrix}\right)=Q\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{S}_{y}(1:r-1,:)\widehat{S}_{x}^{\dagger}w_{i}-\lambda_{i}w_{i}\\
\widetilde{S}_{y}(r,:)\widehat{S}_{x}^{\dagger}w_{i}\end{pmatrix}=Q\begin{pmatrix}\mathbf{0}\\
\widetilde{y}_{r}\widehat{S}_{x}^{\dagger}w_{i}\end{pmatrix},
(33)
where
y
~
r
\widetilde{y}_{r}
denotes the last row of
S
~
y
\widetilde{S}_{y}
.
We have thus proven the following proposition
Proposition 4.2
.
Let
(
О»
i
,
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
)
(\lambda_{i},Q_{x}w_{i})
be the Ritz pair of
A
A
via orthonormal basis
Q
x
Q_{x}
. Then the norms of the residuals can be computed using representations in the basis
Q
Q
as
вҖ–
r
i
вҖ–
2
=
{
вҖ–
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
~
x
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
w
i
вҖ–
2
=
0
,
if
вҖӢ
Q
=
Q
x
вҖ–
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
^
x
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
вҲ’
О»
i
вҖӢ
(
w
i
рқҹҺ
)
вҖ–
2
=
вҖ–
y
~
r
вҖӢ
S
^
x
вҖ 
вҖӢ
w
i
вҖ–
2
,
if
вҖӢ
Q
=
(
Q
x
вҖӢ
q
)
.
\left\lVert r_{i}\right\rVert_{2}=\begin{cases}\|\widetilde{S}_{y}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{\dagger}w_{i}-\lambda_{i}w_{i}\|_{2}=0,\quad\text{if }Q=Q_{x}\\
\|\widetilde{S}_{y}\widehat{S}_{x}^{\dagger}w_{i}-\lambda_{i}\left(\begin{smallmatrix}w_{i}\\
\mathbf{0}\end{smallmatrix}\right)\|_{2}=\|\widetilde{y}_{r}\widehat{S}_{x}^{\dagger}w_{i}\|_{2},\quad\text{if }\;Q=(Q_{x}\ q).\end{cases}
(34)
Proof.
The proof is obtained by taking the norm in equations (
32
) and (
33
) and using the fact that 2-norm is invariant to orthogonal transformations.
вҲҺ
Example 4.3
.
Figure
4
illustrates the formulas from Proposition
4.2
using the vorticity data (Example
2.1
) with streaming snapshots, starting with
n
0
=
20
n_{0}=20
.
Figure 4:
If a new snapshot contributes with a new direction, the basis is expanded and the second formula in (
34
) applies вҖ“ the residuals are not necessarily small. Otherwise, an invariant subspace is reached and all Ritz vectors are exact eigenvectors of the current DMD matrix вҖ“ the first formula in (
34
) applies and the computed (floating-point) residuals are at the level of the roundoff.
4.3
Updating
Assume new snapshot
s
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
s_{new}
becomes available and we have the
S
=
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
S=Q\widetilde{S}
decomposition for all snapshots obtained beforehand. First we check if
s
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
s_{new}
is already in the subspace spanned by
Q
Q
. If not, we expand
Q
Q
to
Q
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
Q
q
)
Q_{new}=\begin{pmatrix}Q&q\end{pmatrix}
using Gram-shmidt procedure (possibly with reorthogonalization).
If it is already in the subspace spanned by
Q
Q
, then
Q
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
Q
Q_{new}=Q
. In both cases
Q
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
Q_{x,new}
is the previous
Q
Q
and the representation of
s
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
s_{new}
in basis spanned by columns of
Q
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
Q_{new}
is
s
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
Q
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
вҖӢ
s
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\widetilde{s}_{new}=Q_{new}^{T}s_{new}
.
The updates are similar as to what was proposed in section
3
therefore only the algorithms follow.
Notice that in one basis scenario with low rank constraints it is not necessary to update
G
y
G_{y}
when working with
G
x
=
X
вҖӢ
X
T
G_{x}=XX^{T}
nor perform TQ decomposition of
S
~
y
\widetilde{S}_{y}
when working with TQ decompositions. That is due to the fact that as
Q
Q
reaches critical number of columns
r
^
\widehat{r}
in the beginning of next iteration, after (only)
G
x
G_{x}
(or
T
T
, depending on the method) is updated, it contains all the information on snapshots spanning orthonormal basis
Q
Q
and it can easily be updated.
Algorithm 8
[
Q
,
G
y
,
x
,
G
x
,
x
~
]
[Q,G_{y,x},G_{x},\widetilde{x}]
=
Addx_one_basis
(
Q
,
G
y
,
x
,
G
x
,
рқҗұ
,
x
~
вҲ’
1
,
tol
,
1
tol
,
2
tol
,
3
r
^
Q,G_{y,x},G_{x},\mathbf{x},\widetilde{x}_{-1},\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2},\texttt{tol}{}_{3},\widehat{r}
)
0:
orthonormal
Q
Q
from (
27
); cross products
G
y
,
x
,
G
x
G_{y,x},G_{x}
from section
4.3
; new snapshot
рқҗұ
\mathbf{x}
; last low-rank snapshot
x
~
вҲ’
1
\widetilde{x}_{-1}
from; tolerances
tol
,
1
tol
,
2
tol
3
\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2},\texttt{tol}{}_{3}
; maximal dimension
r
^
\widehat{r}
0:
Updated matrices
Q
,
G
y
,
x
,
G
x
Q,G_{y,x},G_{x}
, low-rank representation of new snapshot
x
~
\widetilde{x}
1:
if
size
вҖӢ
(
Q
,
2
)
>
size
вҖӢ
(
G
x
,
1
)
\texttt{size}(Q,2)>\texttt{size}(G_{x},1)
then
2:
G
y
,
x
=
(
G
y
,
x
рқҹҺ
)
G_{y,x}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}G_{y,x}&\mathbf{0}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
;
G
x
=
(
G
x
рқҹҺ
рқҹҺ
0
)
G_{x}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}G_{x}&\mathbf{0}\cr\mathbf{0}&0\end{smallmatrix}\right)
3:
end
if
4:
G
x
=
G
x
+
x
~
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
x
~
вҲ’
1
T
G_{x}=G_{x}+\widetilde{x}_{-1}\widetilde{x}_{-1}^{T}
5:
if
size
вҖӢ
(
Q
,
2
)
=
r
^
\texttt{size}(Q,2)=\widehat{r}
then
6:
[
О©
,
Оҳ
]
=
eig
вҖӢ
(
G
x
)
[\Omega,\Theta]=\texttt{eig}(G_{x})
;
ПҒ
=
max
вҒЎ
{
k
:
Оҳ
k
вҖӢ
k
>
tol
3
вҖӢ
Оҳ
11
}
\rho=\max\{k:\Theta_{kk}>\texttt{tol}_{3}\Theta_{11}\}
;
7:
Q
=
Q
О©
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
)
Q=Q\Omega(:,1:\rho)
;
G
x
=
Оҳ
(
1
:
ПҒ
,
1
:
ПҒ
)
G_{x}=\Theta(1:\rho,1:\rho)
;
8:
x
~
вҲ’
1
=
О©
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
)
T
x
~
вҲ’
1
\widetilde{x}_{-1}=\Omega(:,1:\rho)^{T}\widetilde{x}_{-1}
9:
end
if
10:
[
рқҗӘ
,
x
~
,
Оі
]
[\mathbf{q},\widetilde{x},\gamma]
=
GS_update
(
Q
,
рқҗұ
,
tol
,
1
tol
2
Q,\mathbf{x},\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2}
);
11:
if
Оі
>
0
\gamma>0
then
12:
Q
=
(
Q
рқҗӘ
)
Q=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}Q&\mathbf{q}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
;
G
y
,
x
=
(
G
y
,
x
рқҹҺ
)
G_{y,x}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}G_{y,x}\cr\mathbf{0}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
;
x
~
=
(
x
~
Оі
)
\widetilde{x}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}\widetilde{x}\\
\gamma\end{smallmatrix}\right)
13:
end
if
14:
G
y
,
x
=
G
y
,
x
+
x
~
вҖӢ
x
~
вҲ’
1
T
G_{y,x}=G_{y,x}+\widetilde{x}\widetilde{x}_{-1}^{T}
.
Algorithm 9
[
Q
,
G
y
,
q
,
T
,
x
~
]
[Q,G_{y,q},T,\widetilde{x}]
=
AddxTQ_one_basis
(
Q
,
G
y
,
q
,
T
,
рқҗұ
,
x
~
вҲ’
1
,
tol
,
1
tol
,
2
tol
3
Q,G_{y,q},T,\mathbf{x},\widetilde{x}_{-1},\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2},\texttt{tol}{}_{3}
, tri,
r
^
\widehat{r}
)
0:
orthonormal
Q
Q
from (
27
); cross products
G
y
,
q
,
T
G_{y,q},T
as described in section
4.3
; new snapshot
рқҗұ
\mathbf{x}
; last low-rank snapshot
x
~
вҲ’
1
\widetilde{x}_{-1}
from; tolerances
tol
,
1
tol
,
2
tol
3
\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2},\texttt{tol}{}_{3}
; character tri indicating if
T
T
is upper (
вҖҷUвҖҷ
) or lower (
вҖҷLвҖҷ
) triangular; maximal dimension
r
^
\widehat{r}
;
0:
Updated matrices
Q
,
G
y
,
q
,
T
Q,G_{y,q},T
, low-rank representation of new snapshot
x
~
\widetilde{x}
1:
r
=
size
вҖӢ
(
Q
,
2
)
r=\texttt{size}(Q,2)
;
r
x
=
size
вҖӢ
(
T
,
1
)
r_{x}=\texttt{size}(T,1)
2:
if
r
>
r
x
r>r_{x}
then
3:
T
=
(
T
рқҹҺ
)
T=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}T\\
\mathbf{0}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
4:
end
if
5:
T
=
(
T
x
~
вҲ’
1
)
T=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}T&\widetilde{x}_{-1}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
6:
if
r
=
r
^
r=\widehat{r}
and
r
>
r
x
r>r_{x}
then
7:
[
U
,
ОЈ
,
V
]
=
svd
вҖӢ
(
T
)
[U,\Sigma,V]=\texttt{svd}(T)
;
ПҒ
=
max
вҒЎ
{
k
:
ОЈ
k
вҖӢ
k
>
tol
3
вҖӢ
ОЈ
11
}
\rho=\max\{k:\Sigma_{kk}>\texttt{tol}_{3}\Sigma_{11}\}
;
8:
Q
=
Q
U
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
)
Q=QU(:,1:\rho)
;
G
y
,
q
=
U
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
)
T
G
y
,
q
V
(
:
,
1
:
ПҒ
)
G_{y,q}=U(:,1:\rho)^{T}G_{y,q}V(:,1:\rho)
;
T
=
ОЈ
(
1
:
ПҒ
,
1
:
ПҒ
)
T=\Sigma(1:\rho,1:\rho)
;
9:
x
~
вҲ’
1
=
T
вҖӢ
(
:
,
e
вҖӢ
n
вҖӢ
d
)
\widetilde{x}_{-1}=T(:,end)
10:
end
if
11:
[
рқҗӘ
,
x
~
,
Оі
]
=
[\mathbf{q},\widetilde{x},\gamma]=
GS_update
(
Q
,
x
,
tol
,
1
tol
)
2
(Q,x,\texttt{tol}{}_{1},\texttt{tol}{}_{2})
12:
if
Оі
>
0
\gamma>0
then
13:
Q
=
(
Q
рқҗӘ
)
Q=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}Q&\mathbf{q}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
;
x
~
=
(
x
~
Оі
)
\widetilde{x}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}\widetilde{x}\\
\gamma\end{smallmatrix}\right)
14:
end
if
15:
[
G
y
,
q
,
T
]
=
updateYQT
(
G
y
,
q
,
T
(
:
,
1
:
e
n
d
вҲ’
1
)
,
tri
,
x
~
вҲ’
1
,
x
~
,
0
,
Оі
)
[G_{y,q},T]=\texttt{updateYQT}(G_{y,q},T(:,1:end-1),\mathrm{tri},\widetilde{x}_{-1},\widetilde{x},0,\gamma)
.
4.4
KMD and forecasting
Use of one basis instead of two circumvents the usage of exact DMD vectors in reconstruction and subsequently forecasting. The problem from equation (
24
) in the case of
Q
=
Q
x
Q=Q_{x}
is
вҖ–
Q
x
вҖӢ
y
~
n
вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
=
1
в„“
Оұ
i
(
n
)
вҖӢ
Q
x
вҖӢ
w
i
вҖ–
2
=
вҖ–
y
~
n
вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
=
1
в„“
Оұ
i
(
n
)
вҖӢ
w
i
вҖ–
2
,
\|Q_{x}\widetilde{y}_{n}-\sum_{i=1}^{\ell}\alpha_{i}^{(n)}Q_{x}w_{i}\|_{2}=\|\widetilde{y}_{n}-\sum_{i=1}^{\ell}\alpha_{i}^{(n)}w_{i}\|_{2},
(35)
or, in the case of
Q
=
(
Q
x
вҖӢ
q
)
Q=(Q_{x}\ q)
,
вҖ–
(
Q
x
q
)
вҖӢ
y
~
n
вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
=
1
в„“
Оұ
i
(
n
)
вҖӢ
(
Q
x
q
)
вҖӢ
(
w
i
0
)
вҖ–
2
=
вҖ–
y
~
n
вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
=
1
в„“
Оұ
i
(
n
)
вҖӢ
(
w
i
0
)
вҖ–
2
.
\|\begin{pmatrix}Q_{x}&q\end{pmatrix}\,\widetilde{y}_{n}-\sum_{i=1}^{\ell}\alpha_{i}^{(n)}\begin{pmatrix}Q_{x}&q\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}w_{i}\\
0\end{pmatrix}\|_{2}=\|\widetilde{y}_{n}-\sum_{i=1}^{\ell}\alpha_{i}^{(n)}\begin{pmatrix}w_{i}\\
0\end{pmatrix}\|_{2}.
(36)
Using
y
~
n
T
=
(
g
n
T
вҖӢ
Оі
n
)
T
\widetilde{y}_{n}^{T}=\left(g_{n}^{T}\ \gamma_{n}\right)^{T}
from
GS_update
(algorithm
2
), the minimization problem from the expanded basis case (
36
) is equal to minimizing
вҖ–
g
n
вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
в„“
Оұ
i
(
n
)
вҖӢ
w
i
вҖ–
2
\|g_{n}-\sum_{i}^{\ell}\alpha_{i}^{(n)}w_{i}\|_{2}
. In both cases, KMD is done in the subspace of dimension
size
(
Q
x
,
1
)
(Q_{x},1)
instead of
m
m
.
4.4.1
Example: Lifted hydrogen jet flame (BLAST dataset)
Lifted hydrogen jet flame data from BLASTnet database was used with Reynolds numbers
5000
5000
and
7000
7000
(
Chung
et al.
(
2023a
)
,
Chung
et al.
(
2023b
)
). Only velocities
u
x
u_{x}
,
u
y
u_{y}
on a grid
1100
Г—
600
1100\times 600
were used, resulting in snapshots of length
m
=
1320000
m=1320000
. Starting from
n
0
=
20
n_{0}=20
snapshots, reconstruction with rounding to single precision as described in section
3.1.5
was done, this time in one orthogonal basis. For
R
вҖӢ
e
=
5000
Re=5000
, the norm of errors for reconstruction
k
k
steps ahead (
k
=
1
,
2
,
3
,
4
,
5
k=1,2,3,4,5
) were the same (around
10
вҲ’
2
10^{-2}
). In the case
R
вҖӢ
e
=
5000
Re=5000
we used formulas (
35
) and (
36
) for reconstruction to compare the time saving when extracting orthonormal basis. The results are shown in figure
5
. In each case we used all previous snapshots for reconstruction. After
140
140
snapshots were added (
n
=
n
0
+
140
=
160
n=n_{0}+140=160
), time it took to predict
5
5
steps ahead was over
50
50
seconds in full space and only around
5
5
seconds in the orthonormal basis, independent of whether used DMD modes and eigenvalues came from TQ or HWR approach.
When using data with
R
вҖӢ
e
=
7000
Re=7000
, the first attempt to round
G
x
G_{x}
to single precision triggered overflows, meaning that any method based on
G
x
G_{x}
must fail in single precision. On the other hand, TQ was successfully updated with all snapshots and had relative error norms around
10
вҲ’
1
10^{-1}
for prediction one step ahead.
Figure 5:
Speedup when running predictions 5 steps ahead in basis spanned by
Q
Q
or in full space
в„қ
m
\mathbb{R}^{m}
for both HQR-sDMD and TQ-sDMD. Extracting orthonormal basis and performing KMD in a smaller subspace significantly reduces run time resulting in algorithms on average 11 times faster. There is no notable run time difference when performing prediction in smaller subspace with DMD modes and eigenvalues obtained by TQ-sDMD vs. HWR-sDMD.
4.4.2
Example: Gray-Scott model
For another example in one basis we generate snapshots using Gray-Scott model of reaction-diffusion system with parameters
D
u
=
1
,
D
v
=
0.5
,
F
=
0.062
,
k
=
0.061
D_{u}=1,D_{v}=0.5,F=0.062,k=0.061
initialized with three randomly placed squares on a
350
Г—
350
350\times 350
grid (
m
=
122500
m=122500
). Starting with
n
0
=
30
n_{0}=30
, we add up to
300
300
-th snapshot. After each new snapshot we make a prediction up to 5 steps ahead using only the last
30
30
snapshots in reconstruction. The predicted snapshots after observing
n
=
200
n=200
snapshots for HWR-sDMD in double precision and TQ-sDMD in simulated single is shown in figure
6
. Norms of all prediction errors are calculated and shown in figure
7
, including for HWR-sDMD in single precision. Note that using HWR-sDMD in single precision produced
NaN
s in
144
144
predicted snapshots when predicting one step ahead and in
191
191
predicted snapshots when predicting five steps ahead.
Figure 6:
Visualization of predicted dynamics of the Gray-Scott model, using HWR-sDMD (64) and TQ-sDMD (32) five steps ahead after
n
=
200
n=200
observed snapshots.
Figure 7:
Left:
When predicting one step ahead, TQ-sDMD in simulated single basis maintains relative error norms around
10
вҲ’
3
10^{-3}
. Meanwhile, the errors for HWR-sDMD in both simulated single and fully double precision result in errors between
0.1
0.1
and
1
1
with occasional oscillation to larger errors. In HWR-sDMD (32)
144
144
error norms were
NaN
. Error norms for TQ-sDMD in double precision are omitted since they coincide with errors when working in single precision.
Right:
When predicting 5 steps ahead, all errors are larger, but TQ-sDMD errors stay almost always under
0.1
0.1
, while both HWR-sDMD errors stay above
10
10
after first few iterations. HWR-sDMD (32) error norms contains
191
191
NaN
s.
5
Online DMD for long low dimensional trajectory (
m
вүӘ
n
m\ll n
)
Assume the data is such that
m
<
n
m<n
and that
X
X
is of full (row) rank. Then
A
=
Y
вҖӢ
X
вҖ 
A=YX^{\dagger}
is the unique solution of least squares equation for DMD. Since
X
X
is full rank,
X
вҖӢ
X
вҠӨ
XX^{\top}
is invertible and
X
вҖ 
=
X
вҠӨ
вҖӢ
(
X
вҖӢ
X
вҠӨ
)
вҲ’
1
X^{\dagger}=X^{\top}\left(XX^{\top}\right)^{-1}
. Inserting that into
A
=
Y
вҖӢ
X
вҖ 
A=YX^{\dagger}
gives
A
=
(
Y
вҖӢ
X
вҠӨ
)
вҖӢ
(
X
вҖӢ
X
вҠӨ
)
вҲ’
1
=
G
^
y
,
x
вҖӢ
G
^
x
вҲ’
1
A=\left(YX^{\top}\right)\left(XX^{\top}\right)^{-1}=\widehat{G}_{y,x}\widehat{G}_{x}^{-1}
.
5.1
Sherman-Morrison updates of
G
^
x
вҲ’
1
\widehat{G}_{x}^{-1}
Due to the assumption of full row rank, the updates of
G
^
x
\widehat{G}_{x}
,
G
^
y
,
x
\widehat{G}_{y,x}
are always as in В§
2.1
, case (2) (relation (
16
)). Instead of updating
G
^
x
\widehat{G}_{x}
and then inverting it when needed, Zhang et al.
Zhang
et al.
(
2019
)
used Sherman-Morrison formula for direct updates of
G
^
x
вҲ’
1
\widehat{G}_{x}^{-1}
after rank-one additive change of
G
^
x
\widehat{G}_{x}
:
G
^
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
1
=
(
G
^
x
+
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҠӨ
)
вҲ’
1
=
G
^
x
вҲ’
1
вҲ’
G
^
x
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҠӨ
вҖӢ
G
^
x
вҲ’
1
1
+
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҠӨ
вҖӢ
G
^
x
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
.
\widehat{G}_{x,new}^{-1}=({\widehat{G}_{x}}+x_{new}x_{new}^{\top})^{-1}=\widehat{G}_{x}^{-1}-\frac{\widehat{G}_{x}^{-1}x_{new}x_{new}^{\top}\widehat{G}_{x}^{-1}}{1+x_{new}^{\top}\widehat{G}_{x}^{-1}x_{new}}.
(37)
Using this in
A
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
Y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
X
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖ 
A_{new}=Y_{new}X_{new}^{\dagger}
with
X
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
X
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
X_{new}=(X\;x_{new})
,
Y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
Y
вҖӢ
y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
Y_{new}=(Y\;y_{new})
and
P
x
=
G
^
x
вҲ’
1
P_{x}=\widehat{G}_{x}^{-1}
,
Zhang
et al.
(
2019
)
derived an explicit update formula for the DMD matrix:
A
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
A
+
Оі
вҖӢ
(
y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
A
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
вҖӢ
P
x
,
Оі
=
1
/
(
1
+
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
вҖӢ
P
x
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
.
A_{new}=A+\gamma(y_{new}-Ax_{new})x_{new}^{T}P_{x},\;\;\gamma=1/(1+x_{new}^{T}P_{x}x_{new}).
(38)
For the next step,
P
x
P_{x}
is updated, using (
37
), as
P
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
P
x
вҲ’
Оі
вҖӢ
z
вҖӢ
z
T
,
z
=
P
x
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
P_{x,new}=P_{x}-\gamma zz^{T},\;\;z=P_{x}x_{new}
(39)
Note that this updating scheme keeps updating the inverse
P
x
=
G
^
x
вҲ’
1
P_{x}=\widehat{G}_{x}^{-1}
of the positive definite (Gram) matrix
G
^
x
=
X
вҖӢ
X
T
\widehat{G}_{x}=XX^{T}
whose condition number is the squared condition number of the raw data matrix
X
X
. Unlike the update by augmentation as in В§
3.1.3
, here we have persistent rank-one (positive semi-definite) additive correction, meaning
G
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вӘ°
G
x
G_{x,new}\succeq G_{x}
(in the sense of the Loewner partial ordering:
G
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
G
x
G_{x,new}-G_{x}
is positive semidefinite). This implies that
P
x
вӘ°
P
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
P_{x}\succeq P_{x,new}
, which is clearly seen in (
37
), and this means that, in the process of
repeated updating
P
x
вҶҗ
P
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
P_{x}\leftarrow P_{x,new}
in floating-point arithmetic, the matrices
P
x
P_{x}
can
lose numerical definiteness. In fact, this mishap can occur in the very first step when
P
x
P_{x}
is initialized as explicitly computed inverse of
X
вҖӢ
X
T
XX^{T}
.
5.1.1
Extension to HWR-sDMD (
m
>
n
m>n
)
Assume the original setting from HWR-sDMD where
X
=
Q
x
вҖӢ
X
~
,
Y
=
Q
y
вҖӢ
Y
~
X=Q_{x}\widetilde{X},\;Y=Q_{y}\widetilde{Y}
. Instead of updating
G
x
G_{x}
and inverting it, it is possible to directly update
G
x
вҲ’
1
G_{x}^{-1}
. In the scenario where the new snapshot does not expand
Q
Q
the updated matrix
G
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
G
x
+
x
~
вҖӢ
x
~
T
G_{x,new}=G_{x}+\widetilde{x}\widetilde{x}^{T}
and Sherman-Morrison formula (
37
) can be used.
If the new snapshot expands the matrix
Q
Q
,
then
G
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
G
x
рқҹҺ
рқҹҺ
0
)
+
x
~
вҖӢ
x
~
T
G_{x,new}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}G_{x}&\mathbf{0}\\
\mathbf{0}&0\end{smallmatrix}\right)+\widetilde{x}\widetilde{x}^{T}
.
Updates are less direct in this case since matrix
(
G
x
рқҹҺ
рқҹҺ
0
)
\left(\begin{smallmatrix}G_{x}&\mathbf{0}\\
\mathbf{0}&0\end{smallmatrix}\right)
is singular and does not have an inverse. It does however have a pseudoinverse
(
G
x
вҲ’
1
рқҹҺ
рқҹҺ
0
)
\left(\begin{smallmatrix}G_{x}^{-1}&\mathbf{0}\\
\mathbf{0}&0\end{smallmatrix}\right)
.
Back in 1973,
Meyer
Meyer (
1973
)
proved the following theorem.
Theorem 5.1
.
Let
M
M
be
l
1
Г—
l
2
l_{1}\times l_{2}
matrix, and
c
,
d
c,d
vectors of length
l
1
l_{1}
and
l
2
l_{2}
respectively. If
c
вҲү
в„ӣ
вҖӢ
(
M
)
c\notin\mathcal{R}(M)
and
d
вҲү
в„ӣ
вҖӢ
(
M
T
)
d\notin\mathcal{R}(M^{T})
, then
(
M
+
c
вҖӢ
d
T
)
вҖ 
=
M
вҖ 
вҲ’
M
вҖ 
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
u
вҖ 
вҲ’
v
вҖ 
вҖӢ
d
T
вҖӢ
M
вҖ 
+
(
1
+
d
T
вҖӢ
M
вҖ 
вҖӢ
c
)
вҖӢ
v
вҖ 
вҖӢ
u
вҖ 
(M+cd^{T})^{\dagger}=M^{\dagger}-M^{\dagger}cu^{\dagger}-v^{\dagger}d^{T}M^{\dagger}+(1+d^{T}M^{\dagger}c)v^{\dagger}u^{\dagger}
,
with
u
=
(
I
вҲ’
M
вҖӢ
M
вҖ 
)
вҖӢ
c
u=(I-MM^{\dagger})c
,
v
=
d
T
вҖӢ
(
I
вҲ’
M
вҖ 
вҖӢ
M
)
v=d^{T}(I-M^{\dagger}M)
If we denote
G
^
x
=
(
G
x
рқҹҺ
рқҹҺ
0
)
\widehat{G}_{x}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}G_{x}&\mathbf{0}\\
\mathbf{0}&0\end{smallmatrix}\right)
, then
M
=
G
^
x
M=\widehat{G}_{x}
,
c
=
d
=
x
~
=
(
g
x
T
Оі
x
)
T
c=d=\widetilde{x}=\begin{pmatrix}g_{x}^{T}&\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix}^{T}
and
u
=
(
I
вҲ’
G
^
x
вҖӢ
G
^
x
вҖ 
)
вҖӢ
x
~
=
(
рқҹҺ
n
вҖӢ
x
вҖӢ
n
рқҹҺ
рқҹҺ
1
)
вҖӢ
(
g
x
Оі
x
)
=
(
рқҹҺ
Оі
x
)
;
v
=
x
~
T
вҖӢ
(
I
вҲ’
G
^
x
вҖ 
вҖӢ
G
^
x
)
=
u
T
=
(
рқҹҺ
Оі
x
)
.
u=(I-\widehat{G}_{x}\widehat{G}_{x}^{\dagger})\widetilde{x}=\begin{pmatrix}\mathbf{0}_{nxn}&\mathbf{0}\\
\mathbf{0}&1\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}g_{x}\\
\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}\mathbf{0}\\
\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix};\;\;v=\widetilde{x}^{T}(I-\widehat{G}_{x}^{\dagger}\widehat{G}_{x})=u^{T}=\begin{pmatrix}\mathbf{0}&\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix}.
(40)
Using
u
вҖ 
=
v
/
Оі
x
2
u^{\dagger}=v/\gamma_{x}^{2}
,
v
вҖ 
=
u
/
Оі
x
2
v^{\dagger}=u/\gamma_{x}^{2}
, it is easy to show
Proposition 5.2
.
Assume
G
x
вҲ’
1
G_{x}^{-1}
as above is available and let
X
X
denote data matrix of snapshots received so far. If a new snapshot pair
(
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
,
y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
(x_{new},y_{new})
becomes available where
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲү
в„ӣ
вҖӢ
(
X
)
x_{new}\notin\mathcal{R}(X)
, then
G
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
1
G_{x,new}^{-1}
can be computed as
G
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
1
=
(
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҲ’
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
g
x
Оі
x
вҲ’
g
x
T
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
Оі
x
1
+
g
x
T
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
g
x
Оі
x
2
)
.
G_{x,new}^{-1}=\begin{pmatrix}G_{x}^{-1}&-\frac{G_{x}^{-1}g_{x}}{\gamma_{x}}\\
-\frac{g_{x}^{T}G_{x}^{-1}}{\gamma_{x}}&\frac{1+g_{x}^{T}G_{x}^{-1}g_{x}}{\gamma_{x}^{2}}\end{pmatrix}.
(41)
Proof.
Since the last row of
G
^
x
\widehat{G}_{x}
are zeros and
Оі
x
вү 
0
\gamma_{x}\neq 0
, there cannot exist a vector
v
v
such that
G
^
x
вҖӢ
v
=
x
~
\widehat{G}_{x}v=\widetilde{x}
. Therefore, theorem
5.1
can be applied.
вҲҺ
5.2
Updating Cholesky factor of
G
^
x
\widehat{G}_{x}
It is known that the Sherman-Morrison formula can exhibit erratic behavior
Ma
et al.
(
2025
)
.
In the case of the online DMD, this means that computed
P
x
P_{x}
can lose the positive definiteness, which makes the computed results uninterpretable, in particular not in the backward error sense.
We resolve this problem by recalling the well known technique of using positive (semi)definite matrices implicitly. In this concrete case, it means updating the Cholesky factor of
G
x
G_{x}
instead of updating its inverse.
If
G
^
x
=
R
x
T
вҖӢ
R
x
\widehat{G}_{x}=R_{x}^{T}R_{x}
is the Cholesky factorization, then the updating formula (
38
) can be used, but
z
=
P
x
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
z=P_{x}x_{new}
is computed as
R
x
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
(
R
x
вҲ’
T
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
R_{x}^{-1}(R_{x}^{-T}x_{new})
(by solving two triangular systems). The
flop
count of solving two triangular systems is
2
вҖӢ
m
2
2m^{2}
, which is nearly the same as for one matrix-vector multiplications (
2
вҖӢ
m
2
вҲ’
m
2m^{2}-m
). Having
z
z
, the cost of computing
A
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
A_{new}
in (
38
) is
4
вҖӢ
m
2
+
3
вҖӢ
m
+
1
4m^{2}+3m+1
flops
.
At the beginning, the upper triangular factor
R
x
R_{x}
is computed by the QR factorization of the tall
n
Г—
m
n\times m
matrix
X
T
X^{T}
. The cost of this is
2
вҖӢ
n
вҖӢ
m
2
вҲ’
2
вҖӢ
m
3
/
3
2nm^{2}-2m^{3}/3
. On the other hand, the cost of computing
G
x
=
X
вҖӢ
X
T
G_{x}=XX^{T}
, using symmetry, is
n
вҖӢ
m
2
+
n
вҖӢ
m
nm^{2}+nm
, and (
38
) requires initial computation of
P
x
=
G
^
x
вҲ’
1
P_{x}=\widehat{G}_{x}^{-1}
which amounts
m
3
m^{3}
flops (computing the Cholesky factor, inverting it and multiplying triangular factors, and using symmetry). Initially,
m
m
is close to
n
n
вҖ“ the snapshots are collected until
X
X
becomes full row rank. Hence, if the first step is done, e.g., with
n
=
m
n=m
then the overhead is smaller.
The key operation in the online phase is updating the Cholesky factor of
G
^
x
\widehat{G}_{x}
.
Since
G
^
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
X
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
вҖӢ
(
X
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
T
=
G
^
x
+
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
=
(
R
x
T
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
вҖӢ
(
R
x
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
)
,
\widehat{G}_{x,new}=(X\;x_{new})(X\;x_{new})^{T}=\widehat{G}_{x}+x_{new}x_{new}^{T}=\begin{pmatrix}R_{x}^{T}&x_{new}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}R_{x}\cr x_{new}^{T}\end{pmatrix},
the Cholesky factor
R
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
R_{x,new}
of
G
^
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\widehat{G}_{x,new}
is computed implicitly by the QR factorization
G
m
вҖӢ
вӢҜ
вҖӢ
G
2
вҖӢ
G
1
вҖӢ
(
R
x
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
)
=
G
m
вҖӢ
вӢҜ
вҖӢ
G
2
вҖӢ
G
1
вҖӢ
(
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
0
вҲ—
+
+
+
+
)
=
(
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
0
вҲ—
0
0
0
0
)
=
(
R
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
рқҹҺ
)
,
U
G
=
G
m
вҖӢ
вӢҜ
вҖӢ
G
2
вҖӢ
G
1
,
G_{m}\cdots G_{2}G_{1}\begin{pmatrix}R_{x}\cr x_{new}^{T}\end{pmatrix}=G_{m}\cdots G_{2}G_{1}\left(\begin{smallmatrix}*&*&*&*\cr 0&*&*&*\cr 0&0&*&*\cr 0&0&0&*\cr+&+&+&+\end{smallmatrix}\right)=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}*&*&*&*\cr 0&*&*&*\cr 0&0&*&*\cr 0&0&0&*\cr 0&0&0&0\end{smallmatrix}\right)=\begin{pmatrix}R_{x,new}\cr\mathbf{0}\end{pmatrix},\;\;U_{G}=G_{m}\cdots G_{2}G_{1},
(42)
using the sequence of Givens rotations
G
i
G_{i}
with pivotal positions
(
(
i
,
i
)
;
(
m
+
1
,
i
)
)
((i,i);(m+1,i))
for
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
m
i=1,...,m
. The cost of such an update, without using fast scaled rotations, is
3
вҖӢ
m
2
+
O
вҖӢ
(
m
)
3m^{2}+O(m)
flops
.
With fast rotations, this can be reduced to
2.5
вҖӢ
m
2
+
O
вҖӢ
(
m
)
2.5m^{2}+O(m)
flops
. For comparison, direct update of
P
x
P_{x}
requires, by exploiting symmetry
11
11
11
In LAPACK, the symmetry of low rank updates is used in the subroutine DSYRK.
and using already computed
z
=
P
x
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
z=P_{x}x_{new}
,
m
2
+
O
вҖӢ
(
m
)
m^{2}+O(m)
flops
. To summarize:
Proposition 5.3
.
Let
X
X
and
Y
Y
be data matrices and let
X
X
have full row rank. Assume that the Cholesky decomposition
X
вҖӢ
X
T
=
R
x
T
вҖӢ
R
x
XX^{T}=R_{x}^{T}R_{x}
is available. After receiving a new pair of snapshots
(
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
,
y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
(x_{new},y_{new})
, the matrices
R
x
R_{x}
and
A
=
Y
вҖӢ
X
вҖ 
=
(
Y
вҖӢ
X
T
)
вҖӢ
(
X
вҖӢ
X
T
)
вҲ’
1
A=YX^{\dagger}=(YX^{T})(XX^{T})^{-1}
can be updated as
A
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
A
+
Оі
вҖӢ
(
y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
A
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
вҖӢ
p
x
T
,
p
x
=
(
R
x
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
(
R
x
вҲ’
T
вҖӢ
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
)
,
Оі
=
1
/
(
1
+
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
вҖӢ
p
x
)
,
A_{new}=A+\gamma(y_{new}-Ax_{new})p_{x}^{T},\quad p_{x}=(R_{x}^{-1}(R_{x}^{-T}x_{new})),\quad\gamma=1/(1+x_{new}^{T}p_{x}),
(43)
where
U
G
U_{G}
is the product of Givens rotations from (
42
) and
R
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
U
G
(
1
:
m
,
1
:
m
+
1
)
(
R
x
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
)
R_{x,new}=U_{G}(1:m,1:m+1)\left(\begin{smallmatrix}R_{x}\\
x_{new}^{T}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
is the update of
R
x
R_{x}
to be used in next iteration.
Remark 7
.
In addition to maintaining the positive definiteness of
P
x
P_{x}
, which is implicitly assured, we have avoided the squared condition number because
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
R
x
)
=
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
G
^
x
)
1
/
2
=
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
P
x
)
1
/
2
=
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
X
)
\kappa_{2}(R_{x})=\kappa_{2}(\widehat{G}_{x})^{1/2}=\kappa_{2}(P_{x})^{1/2}=\kappa_{2}(X)
. Example
5.3.1
illustrates the significance of this.
Since
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
P
x
)
=
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
R
x
)
\sqrt{\kappa_{2}(P_{x})}=\kappa_{2}(R_{x})
and
R
x
R_{x}
is upper triangular, we can use fast condition estimators for triangular matrices and always have useful error estimate.
5.3
Updating TQ decomposition
Another approach that avoids using the Sherman-Morrison formula entirely is to use TQ decomposition of
X
X
. Assume TQ decomposition of
X
X
is available,
X
T
=
Q
вҖӢ
T
T
X^{T}=QT^{T}
, where
T
вҲҲ
в„қ
m
Г—
m
T\in\mathbb{R}^{m\times m}
is a triangular matrix and
Q
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
Г—
m
Q\in\mathbb{R}^{n\times m}
orthonormal (
Q
T
вҖӢ
Q
=
I
Q^{T}Q=I
). Then,
A
=
(
Y
вҖӢ
Q
)
вҖӢ
T
вҲ’
1
=
G
^
y
,
q
вҖӢ
T
вҲ’
1
A=\left(YQ\right)T^{-1}=\widehat{G}_{y,q}T^{-1}
.
When a new snapshot pair becomes available
(
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
,
y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
(x_{new},y_{new})
,
(
X
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
=
(
T
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
вҖӢ
(
Q
T
рқҹҺ
рқҹҺ
1
)
,
(
Y
y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
вҖӢ
(
Q
рқҹҺ
рқҹҺ
1
)
=
(
G
^
y
,
q
y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
.
\begin{pmatrix}X&x_{new}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}T&x_{new}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}Q^{T}&\mathbf{0}\\
\mathbf{0}&1\end{pmatrix},\;\;\begin{pmatrix}Y&y_{new}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}Q&\mathbf{0}\\
\mathbf{0}&1\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}\widehat{G}_{y,q}&y_{new}\end{pmatrix}.
(44)
The expression above can be returned to proper TQ factorization using Givens rotations. The schema for application of rotations if
T
T
is upper triangular is
(
T
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
вҖӢ
G
m
T
вҖӢ
вӢҜ
вҖӢ
G
2
T
вҖӢ
G
1
T
=
(
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
+
0
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
+
0
0
вҲ—
вҲ—
+
0
0
0
вҲ—
+
)
вҖӢ
G
m
T
вҖӢ
вӢҜ
вҖӢ
G
2
T
вҖӢ
G
1
T
=
(
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
0
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
0
0
вҲ—
0
)
=
(
T
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
рқҹҺ
)
,
\begin{pmatrix}T&x_{new}\end{pmatrix}G_{m}^{T}\cdots G_{2}^{T}G_{1}^{T}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}*&*&*&*&+\cr 0&*&*&*&+\cr 0&0&*&*&+\cr 0&0&0&*&+\cr\end{smallmatrix}\right)G_{m}^{T}\cdots G_{2}^{T}G_{1}^{T}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}*&*&*&*&0\cr 0&*&*&*&0\cr 0&0&*&*&0\cr 0&0&0&*&0\cr\end{smallmatrix}\right)=\begin{pmatrix}T_{new}&\mathbf{0}\end{pmatrix},
(45)
and in the case of lower triangular
T
T
,
(
T
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
вҖӢ
G
1
T
вҖӢ
G
2
T
вҖӢ
вӢҜ
вҖӢ
G
m
T
=
(
вҲ—
0
0
0
+
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
+
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
+
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
+
)
вҖӢ
G
1
T
вҖӢ
G
2
T
вҖӢ
вӢҜ
вҖӢ
G
m
T
=
(
вҲ—
0
0
0
0
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
0
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
0
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
0
)
=
(
T
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
рқҹҺ
)
.
\begin{pmatrix}T&x_{new}\end{pmatrix}G_{1}^{T}G_{2}^{T}\cdots G_{m}^{T}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}*&0&0&0&+\cr*&*&0&0&+\cr*&*&*&0&+\cr*&*&*&*&+\cr\end{smallmatrix}\right)G_{1}^{T}G_{2}^{T}\cdots G_{m}^{T}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}*&0&0&0&0\cr*&*&0&0&0\cr*&*&*&0&0\cr*&*&*&*&0\cr\end{smallmatrix}\right)=\begin{pmatrix}T_{new}&\mathbf{0}\end{pmatrix}.
(46)
Updates to
G
^
y
,
q
\widehat{G}_{y,q}
and
T
T
are then obtained by
T
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
T
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
U
G
T
(
:
,
1
:
m
)
,
G
^
y
,
q
(
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
=
(
Y
вҖӢ
Q
y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
U
G
T
(
:
,
1
:
m
)
,
T_{new}=\begin{pmatrix}T&x_{new}\end{pmatrix}U_{G}^{T}(:,1:m),\;\;\widehat{G}_{y,q}^{(new)}=\begin{pmatrix}YQ&y_{new}\end{pmatrix}U_{G}^{T}(:,1:m),
(47)
where the notation
U
G
U_{G}
for a series of Givens rotations was reused. Therefore
G
^
y
,
q
\widehat{G}_{y,q}
and
T
T
can be updated by calling
[
G
^
y
,
q
,
T
]
=
updateYQT
вҖӢ
(
G
^
y
,
q
,
T
,
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
,
y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
,
0
,
0
,
tri
)
[\widehat{G}_{y,q},T]=\texttt{updateYQT}(\widehat{G}_{y,q},T,x_{new},y_{new},0,0,\mathrm{tri})
(Algorithm
5
).
5.3.1
Example: ChuaвҖҷs circuit
The discussion from this section can be illustrated using one challenging example from dynamical systems: the ChuaвҖҷs circuit
Chua (
1980
)
,
Matsumoto (
1984
)
. The system is numerically simulated on a discrete uniform grid in
[
0
,
t
max
]
[0,t_{\max}]
with spacing
О”
вҖӢ
t
\Delta t
and initial condition
рқҗұ
0
=
(
x
0
,
y
0
,
z
0
)
\mathbf{x}_{0}=(x_{0},y_{0},z_{0})
, using
RK45 solver. The observables are
x
,
y
,
z
,
x
2
,
y
2
,
z
2
x,y,z,x^{2},y^{2},z^{2}
. The initial blocks
X
0
X_{0}
and
Y
0
Y_{0}
are
6
Г—
n
0
6\times n_{0}
.
The updating formulas are tested simply by comparing the updated matrix
A
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
A_{new}
with the explicitly computed reference value
Y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
X
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖ 
Y_{new}X_{new}^{\dagger}
.
The purpose of the example is to illustrate the numerical aspects of the updating formulas and
the advantage of the methods proposed in this and previous section. All of the calculations were done entirely in double precision.
The results of experiments with the ChuaвҖҷs circuit (using a concrete example from
ChuaCircuits.com (
2025
)
) are shown in Figure
8
. In the first two, the condition numbers of
X
X
behaved well - there was almost no growth. But, as pointed out in В§
3.1.1
(Proposition
3.2
), this cannot be guaranteed. Indeed, the last panel shows a persistent growth. Furthermore, figure
9(a)
shows that even if a larger number of initial snapshots
n
0
n_{0}
is used, the initial error for classical SM method might be smaller in the beginning but still grow. Meanwhile, Cholesky and TQ decompositon approaches display almost the same, relatively small error as before.
(a)
x
0
=
[
вҲ’
0.7
,
0.1
,
0.1
]
,
О”
вҖӢ
t
=
10
вҲ’
3
x_{0}=[-0.7,0.1,0.1],\Delta t=10^{-3}
(b)
x
0
=
[
вҲ’
0.7
,
0.1
,
0.1
]
,
О”
вҖӢ
t
=
10
вҲ’
4
x_{0}=[-0.7,0.1,0.1],\Delta t=10^{-4}
(c)
x
0
=
[
вҲ’
10.7
,
0
,
0
]
,
О”
вҖӢ
t
=
10
вҲ’
3
x_{0}=[-10.7,0,0],\Delta t=10^{-3}
Figure 8:
Relative error for
вҖ–
A
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
Y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
X
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖ 
вҖ–
2
/
вҖ–
Y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
X
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖ 
вҖ–
2
||A_{new}-Y_{new}X_{new}^{\dagger}||_{2}/||Y_{new}X_{new}^{\dagger}||_{2}
obtained using classical SM formula (
A
S
вҖӢ
M
A_{SM}
), SM with Cholesky (
A
C
вҖӢ
h
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
l
A_{Chol}
) and using TQ decomposition (
A
T
вҖӢ
Q
A_{TQ}
). The relative error is low for
A
C
вҖӢ
h
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
l
A_{Chol}
and
A
T
вҖӢ
Q
A_{TQ}
decomposition approach and consistently below or near
m
вҖӢ
Оө
вҖӢ
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
X
)
m\varepsilon\kappa_{2}(X)
, while the error for
A
S
вҖӢ
M
A_{SM}
grows noticeably in all three examples. We also observed that matrix
P
x
P_{x}
lost its positive definiteness either during initialization (middle scenario) or at some point during the updates (left and right scenarios).
Clearly, if the data, selected observables and other parameters (e.g.,
n
0
n_{0}
) are such that the problem is ill-conditioned the computation will fail. This is illustrated in figures
9(b)
and
9(c)
. An important advantage of our proposed method is that the
O
вҖӢ
(
m
)
вҖӢ
Пө
вҖӢ
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
X
)
O(m)\epsilon\kappa_{2}(X)
bound can be used as a reliable indicator of accuracy. It can be efficiently computed as discussed in Remark
7
. Note how in the last two panels
m
вҖӢ
Пө
вҖӢ
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
X
)
m\epsilon\kappa_{2}(X)
determines the accuracy as long as it is below one. Once it passes over one, no method can guarantee any accuracy in the computed matrix
A
A
.
(a)
n
0
=
250
n_{0}=250
(b)
t
m
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
x
=
70
,
n
0
=
100
t_{max}=70,n_{0}=100
(c)
x
0
=
[
10
вҲ’
15
,
0
,
0
]
,
n
0
=
50
x_{0}=[10^{-15},0,0],n_{0}=50
Figure 9:
Left:
For larger
n
0
n_{0}
the initial error for
A
S
вҖӢ
M
A_{SM}
is smaller. It still starts growing at some point, while errors for
A
C
вҖӢ
h
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
l
A_{Chol}
and
A
T
вҖӢ
Q
A_{TQ}
remain relatively small.
Middle:
Errors for
A
T
вҖӢ
Q
,
A
C
вҖӢ
h
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
l
A_{TQ},A_{Chol}
follow
m
вҖӢ
Оө
вҖӢ
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
X
)
m\varepsilon\kappa_{2}(X)
curve while it is smaller than
вүҲ
1
\approx 1
.
Right:
All errors start high. As
m
вҖӢ
Оө
вҖӢ
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
X
)
m\varepsilon\kappa_{2}(X)
approaches
вүҲ
1
\approx 1
, errors for
A
C
вҖӢ
h
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
l
A_{Chol}
and
A
T
вҖӢ
Q
A_{TQ}
dampen, while
A
S
вҖӢ
M
A_{SM}
does not manage to recover.
6
Concluding remarks and outlook
We have provided new numerically robust core subroutines for streaming applications of the (E)DMD.
The next steps in our work include out-of-core implementations, and extending these methods to dynamically changed data window widths, where
the oldest data are gradually or abruptly discarded, as dictated by sudden changes in the dynamics and
guided by the forecast performance. This will be done for several variations of the (E)DMD, and for applications such as e.g. adaptive data driven model predictive control.
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by the Croatian Science Foundation (HRZZ) Grant IP-2025-02-3733
вҖңData driven identification and dimension reduction of dynamical systemsвҖқ
,
and by the European Union вҖ“ NextGenerationEU through the National Recovery and Resilience Plan 2021-2026, institutional grant of University of Zagreb Faculty of Science (IK IA 1.1.3. Impact4Math).
7
Appendix
7.1
Generalization of Sherman-Morrison updates
It is possible to extend the Sherman-Morrison updates proposed by Zhang et al. (section
5
) to
accommodate changes in the rank of the streaming data matrix
X
X
. When
X
X
isnвҖҷt full rank, the DMD matrix
A
A
is not uniquely determined since the least-squares problem is under-determined. If
X
X
is decomposed into orthogonal matrix and low-rank component
X
=
Q
x
вҖӢ
X
~
X=Q_{x}\widetilde{X}
,
then snapshot matrix can be decomposed as
S
=
Q
вҖӢ
S
~
S=Q\widetilde{S}
, with
Q
Q
obtained by (potentially) expanding
Q
x
Q_{x}
as in section
4
. It is simple to show that the formulas for the Rayleigh-Ritz matrix
Q
x
T
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
Q
x
Q_{x}^{T}AQ_{x}
are exactly (
30
) or (
31
) depending on the last row of
S
~
\widetilde{S}
. As new snapshots arrive, the rank of
S
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
S_{new}
might increase, expanding
Q
x
Q_{x}
and
Q
Q
. The method we propose manages to update
G
x
G_{x}
and
A
~
\widetilde{A}
in both scenarios (expansion or no expansion) and keeps good numerical properties. This method can also be used in tall data matrix scenario (
m
>
n
m>n
) to update
G
x
вҲ’
1
G_{x}^{-1}
(instead of
G
x
G_{x}
and then inverting) since the same formulas are used ((
30
) and (
31
)).
Proposition 7.1
.
Using the notation from section
4
, let
G
x
=
(
S
ВҜ
x
вҖӢ
S
ВҜ
x
T
)
G_{x}=(\overline{S}_{x}\overline{S}_{x}^{T})
and
A
~
=
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
ВҜ
x
вҖ 
=
(
S
~
y
вҖӢ
S
ВҜ
x
T
)
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
\widetilde{A}=\widetilde{S}_{y}\overline{S}_{x}^{\dagger}=(\widetilde{S}_{y}\overline{S}_{x}^{T})G_{x}^{-1}
. Assume new snapshot pair becomes available
(
x
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
,
y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
)
(x_{new},y_{new})
, and let
g
x
,
Оі
x
g_{x},\gamma_{x}
and
g
y
,
Оі
y
g_{y},\gamma_{y}
be the results of GS procedure as described in algorithm
2
. Using
R
x
R_{x}
from the QR decomposition of
S
ВҜ
x
T
=
Q
~
вҖӢ
R
x
\overline{S}_{x}^{T}=\widetilde{Q}R_{x}
, if
Оі
x
>
0
\gamma_{x}>0
A
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
{
(
A
~
вҲ’
1
Оі
x
вҖӢ
(
A
~
вҖӢ
g
x
вҲ’
g
y
)
)
,
Оі
y
=
0
,
(
A
~
вҲ’
1
Оі
x
вҖӢ
(
A
~
вҖӢ
g
x
вҲ’
g
y
)
рқҹҺ
Оі
y
/
Оі
x
)
,
Оі
y
>
0
,
R
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
U
G
вҖӢ
(
R
x
рқҹҺ
g
x
T
Оі
x
)
.
\widetilde{A}_{new}=\begin{cases}\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{A}&-\frac{1}{\gamma_{x}}\left(\widetilde{A}g_{x}-g_{y}\right)\end{pmatrix},\quad\gamma_{y}=0,\\
\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{A}&-\frac{1}{\gamma_{x}}\left(\widetilde{A}g_{x}-g_{y}\right)\\
\mathbf{0}&\gamma_{y}/\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix},\quad\gamma_{y}>0,\end{cases}\quad\quad R_{x,new}=U_{G}\begin{pmatrix}R_{x}&\mathbf{0}\\
g_{x}^{T}&\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix}.
(48)
And with
z
=
R
x
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
(
R
x
вҲ’
T
вҖӢ
g
x
)
z=R_{x}^{-1}(R_{x}^{-T}g_{x})
and
Оұ
=
1
+
(
g
x
T
вҖӢ
R
x
вҲ’
1
)
вҖӢ
(
R
x
вҲ’
T
вҖӢ
g
x
)
\alpha=1+(g_{x}^{T}R_{x}^{-1})(R_{x}^{-T}g_{x})
, if
Оі
x
=
0
\gamma_{x}=0
A
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
{
A
~
вҲ’
Оұ
вҖӢ
(
A
~
вҖӢ
g
x
вҲ’
g
y
)
вҖӢ
z
T
,
Оі
y
=
0
,
(
A
~
вҲ’
Оұ
(
A
~
g
x
вҲ’
g
y
)
z
T
)
(
Оі
y
/
Оұ
)
вҖӢ
z
T
)
,
Оі
y
>
0
,
R
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
U
G
(
1
:
e
n
d
вҲ’
1
,
:
)
(
R
x
g
x
T
)
.
\widetilde{A}_{new}=\begin{cases}\widetilde{A}-\alpha\left(\widetilde{A}g_{x}-g_{y}\right)z^{T},\quad\gamma_{y}=0,\\
\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{A}-\alpha\left(\widetilde{A}g_{x}-g_{y})z^{T}\right)\\
(\gamma_{y}/\alpha)z^{T}\end{pmatrix},\quad\gamma_{y}>0,\end{cases}\quad\quad R_{x,new}=U_{G}(1:end-1,:)\begin{pmatrix}R_{x}\\
g_{x}^{T}\end{pmatrix}.
(49)
Remark 8
.
These formulas use the same "trick" to avoid updating (and keeping) the matrix
G
y
,
x
G_{y,x}
as Zhang et al.
Zhang
et al.
(
2019
)
by applying MeyerвҖҷs or Sherman-Morrison formula directly into
A
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\widetilde{A}_{new}
formulated via
A
~
\widetilde{A}
and new snapshots.
Proof.
Assume
Оі
x
>
0
\gamma_{x}>0
(
S
ВҜ
x
=
S
^
x
\overline{S}_{x}=\widehat{S}_{x}
) and
Оі
y
=
0
\gamma_{y}=0
. Using the MeyerвҖҷs formula for
G
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
1
G_{x,new}^{-1}
gives
A
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\displaystyle\widetilde{A}_{new}
=
(
S
~
y
g
y
)
вҖӢ
(
S
^
x
T
рқҹҺ
g
x
T
Оі
x
)
вҖӢ
(
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҲ’
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
g
x
Оі
x
вҲ’
g
x
T
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
Оі
x
1
+
g
x
T
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
g
x
Оі
x
2
)
=
(
G
y
,
x
рқҹҺ
)
вҖӢ
G
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
1
+
g
y
вҖӢ
(
g
x
T
Оі
x
)
вҖӢ
G
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
1
\displaystyle=\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{S}_{y}&g_{y}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}\widehat{S}_{x}^{T}&\mathbf{0}\\
g_{x}^{T}&\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}G_{x}^{-1}&-\frac{G_{x}^{-1}g_{x}}{\gamma_{x}}\\
-\frac{g_{x}^{T}G_{x}^{-1}}{\gamma_{x}}&\frac{1+g_{x}^{T}G_{x}^{-1}g_{x}}{\gamma_{x}^{2}}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}G_{y,x}&\mathbf{0}\end{pmatrix}G_{x,new}^{-1}+g_{y}\begin{pmatrix}g_{x}^{T}&\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix}G_{x,new}^{-1}
=
(
G
y
,
x
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҲ’
G
y
,
x
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
Оі
x
)
+
g
y
вҖӢ
(
рқҹҺ
1
/
Оі
x
)
=
(
A
~
вҲ’
1
Оі
x
вҖӢ
(
A
~
вҖӢ
g
x
вҲ’
g
y
)
)
.
\displaystyle=\begin{pmatrix}G_{y,x}G_{x}^{-1}&-\frac{G_{y,x}G_{x}^{-1}}{\gamma_{x}}\end{pmatrix}+g_{y}\begin{pmatrix}\mathbf{0}&1/\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{A}&-\frac{1}{\gamma_{x}}\left(\widetilde{A}g_{x}-g_{y}\right)\end{pmatrix}.
If
Оі
y
>
0
\gamma_{y}>0
, starting with
A
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
S
~
y
g
y
рқҹҺ
Оі
y
)
вҖӢ
(
S
^
x
T
рқҹҺ
g
x
T
Оі
x
)
вҖӢ
G
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
1
\widetilde{A}_{new}=\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{S}_{y}&g_{y}\\
\mathbf{0}&\gamma_{y}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}\widehat{S}_{x}^{T}&\mathbf{0}\\
g_{x}^{T}&\gamma_{x}\end{pmatrix}G_{x,new}^{-1}
the similar result can be proved. In both cases
S
ВҜ
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
=
(
Q
~
рқҹҺ
рқҹҺ
1
)
вҖӢ
(
R
рқҹҺ
g
x
T
Оі
x
)
=
Q
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
R
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\overline{S}_{x,new}^{T}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}\widetilde{Q}&\mathbf{0}\\
\mathbf{0}&1\end{smallmatrix}\right)\left(\begin{smallmatrix}R&\mathbf{0}\\
g_{x}^{T}&\gamma_{x}\end{smallmatrix}\right)=\widetilde{Q}_{new}R_{x,new}
, and
R
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
R_{x,new}
is returned to upper-triangular by a series of Givens transformations denoted by
U
G
U_{G}
(as in (
42
), except the last row is non-zero, and therefore not discarded).
In the scenario where
Оі
x
=
0
\gamma_{x}=0
, Cholesky updates and Sherman-Morrison formula can be used. In this case
G
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
1
=
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҲ’
1
Оұ
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
x
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҖӢ
x
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
G_{x,new}^{-1}=G_{x}^{-1}-\frac{1}{\alpha}G_{x}^{-1}\widetilde{x}_{new}\widetilde{x}_{new}^{T}G_{x}^{-1}
and, for
Оі
y
=
0
\gamma_{y}=0
A
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
\displaystyle\widetilde{A}_{new}
=
(
S
~
y
g
y
)
вҖӢ
(
S
~
x
T
g
x
T
)
вҖӢ
(
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҲ’
1
Оұ
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
g
x
вҖӢ
g
x
T
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
)
\displaystyle=\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{S}_{y}&g_{y}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{T}\\
g_{x}^{T}\end{pmatrix}\left(G_{x}^{-1}-\frac{1}{\alpha}G_{x}^{-1}g_{x}g_{x}^{T}G_{x}^{-1}\right)
=
G
y
,
x
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҲ’
1
Оұ
вҖӢ
G
y
,
x
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
g
x
вҖӢ
g
x
T
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
+
g
y
вҖӢ
g
x
T
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
вҲ’
1
Оұ
вҖӢ
(
Оұ
вҲ’
1
)
вҖӢ
g
y
вҖӢ
g
x
T
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
\displaystyle=G_{y,x}G_{x}^{-1}-\frac{1}{\alpha}G_{y,x}G_{x}^{-1}g_{x}g_{x}^{T}G_{x}^{-1}+g_{y}g_{x}^{T}G_{x}^{-1}-\frac{1}{\alpha}(\alpha-1)g_{y}g_{x}^{T}G_{x}^{-1}
=
A
~
вҲ’
1
Оұ
вҖӢ
(
A
~
вҖӢ
g
x
вҲ’
g
y
)
вҖӢ
g
x
T
вҖӢ
G
x
вҲ’
1
=
A
~
вҲ’
1
Оұ
вҖӢ
(
A
~
вҖӢ
g
x
вҲ’
g
y
)
вҖӢ
z
T
.
\displaystyle=\widetilde{A}-\frac{1}{\alpha}\left(\widetilde{A}g_{x}-g_{y}\right)g_{x}^{T}G_{x}^{-1}=\widetilde{A}-\frac{1}{\alpha}\left(\widetilde{A}g_{x}-g_{y}\right)z^{T}.
The similar result can be shown for
Оі
y
>
0
\gamma_{y}>0
starting with
A
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
=
(
S
~
y
g
y
рқҹҺ
Оі
y
)
вҖӢ
(
S
~
x
T
g
x
T
)
вҖӢ
G
x
,
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
1
.
\widetilde{A}_{new}=\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{S}_{y}&g_{y}\\
\mathbf{0}&\gamma_{y}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}\widetilde{S}_{x}^{T}\\
g_{x}^{T}\end{pmatrix}G_{x,new}^{-1}.
In this case
X
~
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
T
=
(
Q
рқҹҺ
рқҹҺ
1
)
вҖӢ
(
R
x
g
x
T
)
\widetilde{X}_{new}^{T}=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}Q&\mathbf{0}\\
\mathbf{0}&1\end{smallmatrix}\right)\left(\begin{smallmatrix}R_{x}\\
g_{x}^{T}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
and, after updating the last row of
(
R
x
g
x
T
)
\left(\begin{smallmatrix}R_{x}\\
g_{x}^{T}\end{smallmatrix}\right)
to zeros, only the upper triangle is saved (as in (
42
)).
вҲҺ
Remark 9
.
To use this method in practice,
Q
Q
must also be updated. If
Оі
y
>
0
\gamma_{y}>0
,
Q
Q
is expanded by new orthogonal column (obtained by GS on
y
n
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
w
y_{new}
), otherwise it stays the same. This can be done at the end of updates described above.
This method (denoted as Exp-sDMD) was applied on Gray-Scott data from subsection
4.4.2
with the same parameters and produced similar results to TQ-sDMD method. Since only the Cholesky factor is updated and used, instead of explicitly forming
S
ВҜ
x
вҖӢ
S
ВҜ
x
T
\overline{S}_{x}\overline{S}_{x}^{T}
, we expect this algorithm to be more robust than HWR-sDMD in finite precision, so long as the Sherman-Morrison and MeyerвҖҷs formula perform well numerically.
Figure 10:
Prediction
1
1
step ahead when using HWR-sDMD (64), Exp-sDMD (32) described in this section and TQ-sDMD (32). Exp-sDMD predicts similar snapshots as TQ-sDMD.
Figure 11:
Prediction
5
5
steps ahead when using HWR-sDMD (64), Exp-sDMD (32) described in this section and TQ-sDMD (32). Exp-sDMD predicts similar snapshots as TQ-sDMD.
Figure 12:
Relative error norms for prediction
1
1
step ahead (
left
) and
5
5
steps ahead (
right
) when using HWR-sDMD (64), Exp-sDMD (32) and TQ-sDMD (32). Exp-sDMD has almost the same error norms as TQ-sDMD.
7.2
Initialization
All schemes for fast updating of the DMD matrix
A
A
require initialization
A
=
Y
вҖӢ
X
вҖ 
A=YX^{\dagger}
, which is the solution of the least squares problem
вҖ–
A
вҖӢ
X
вҲ’
Y
вҖ–
F
вҶ’
min
A
\|AX-Y\|_{F}\rightarrow\min_{A}
.
There are two typical ways to do that in practice. The theoretically sound way is to compute the pseudoinverse of
X
X
and then multiply,
A
(
p
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
n
вҖӢ
v
)
=
Y
вӢ…
pinv
вҖӢ
(
X
)
A^{(pinv)}=Y\cdot\texttt{pinv}(X)
. This is appealing because of the rich theory of the pseudoinverse and availability of the function that computes it in popular software packages such as Python, Matlab, Octave. The other is to solve the LS problem
вҖ–
X
T
вҖӢ
A
T
вҲ’
Y
T
вҖ–
F
вҶ’
min
A
\|X^{T}A^{T}-Y^{T}\|_{F}\rightarrow\min_{A}
using rank revealing QR factorization (implemented as
solve
in pythonвҖҷs scipy or
\
вҖІ
вҖІ
{}^{\prime}\backslash{}^{\prime}
in matlab) вҖ“ thus obtained solution will be denoted by
A
(
s
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
l
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
e
)
A^{(solve)}
.
In general, using the pseudoinverse in situations like this one is ill-advised. We
illustrate this by showing how the second option provides better initial approximation and, consequently, smaller errors during the subsequent updates. Similarly, when using SM method,
P
x
=
G
x
вҲ’
1
P_{x}=G_{x}^{-1}
can be initialized by calling
pinv
, which we will denote by
P
x
(
p
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
n
вҖӢ
v
)
P_{x}^{(pinv)}
, or by using
solve
with the added information that
G
x
G_{x}
is a positive definite matrix, which we will denote by
P
x
(
s
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
l
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
e
)
P_{x}^{(solve)}
, implicitly using Cholesky decomposition.
Example 7.2
.
We observe ChuaвҖҷs system with
x
0
=
[
вҲ’
0.7
,
0.1
,
0.1
]
,
t
m
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
x
=
10
x_{0}=[-0.7,0.1,0.1],t_{max}=10
,
О”
вҖӢ
t
=
10
вҲ’
3
\Delta t=10^{-3}
and
n
0
=
100
n_{0}=100
. Observables are
x
,
y
,
z
,
x
2
,
y
2
,
z
2
x,y,z,x^{2},y^{2},z^{2}
. Figure
13
displays the error difference when using the same algorithms but different initializations for
A
A
and
P
x
P_{x}
. In the left figure,
A
0
A_{0}
is initialized using
pinv
and in the right using
solve
. Each figure displays norm error with
P
x
P_{x}
initialized using
pinv
and
solve
for SM method. The figures confirm it is better to use
solve
for both
A
0
A_{0}
and
P
x
P_{x}
. Algorithm TQ-sDMD is calculated in the same matter in both figures.
(a)
A
0
A_{0}
initialized using
pinv
(b)
A
0
A_{0}
initialized using
solve
Figure 13:
Initializing
A
C
вҖӢ
h
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
l
A_{Chol}
by
pinv
results in larger starting error that is inherited by further iterations. Initialization of
A
S
вҖӢ
M
A_{SM}
does not affect SM as much as the initialization of
P
x
P_{x}
вҖ“ when SM is initialized with
pinv
(SM-pinv), it produces larger errors than when using
solve
(SM-solve).
Example 7.3
.
Next dynamical system we observe is Lorenz system. As initial point we take
x
0
=
[
1
,
1
,
1
]
x_{0}=[1,1,1]
,
t
m
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
x
=
20
t_{max}=20
,
О”
вҖӢ
t
=
0.002
\Delta t=0.002
and classical parameters of the system
Пғ
=
10
,
ПҒ
=
28
,
ОІ
=
8
/
3
\sigma=10,\rho=28,\beta=8/3
. Again we take
x
,
y
,
z
,
x
2
,
y
2
,
z
2
x,y,z,x^{2},y^{2},z^{2}
as observables and
n
0
=
100
n_{0}=100
.
Unlike in ChuaвҖҷs system, the initialization of
A
0
A_{0}
makes little difference accuracy wise. There is a difference whether we use
P
x
(
p
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
n
вҖӢ
v
)
P_{x}^{(pinv)}
or
P
x
(
s
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
l
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
e
)
P_{x}^{(solve)}
. The reason for that is the implicit usage of Cholesky factorization of
G
x
G_{x}
when using solve, replacing calculated
G
x
G_{x}
with the triangular matrix
R
^
x
\widehat{R}_{x}
with condition number
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
R
^
x
)
=
Оә
2
вҖӢ
(
G
x
)
\kappa_{2}(\widehat{R}_{x})=\sqrt{\kappa_{2}(G_{x})}
. Keep in mind that, in practice,
R
^
x
\widehat{R}_{x}
is not the same triangular matrix as
R
x
R_{x}
obtained by QR factorization of
X
T
X^{T}
due to rounding errors that have occurred as
G
x
=
X
вҖӢ
X
T
G_{x}=XX^{T}
was formed. The errors in
A
A
and
P
x
P_{x}
depending on initialization are observed in figures
14
and
15
.
(a)
A
0
A_{0}
initialized using
pinv
(b)
A
0
A_{0}
initialized using
solve
Figure 14:
Starting
A
0
A_{0}
with
solve
or
pinv
makes very little difference in this scenario. On the other hand, initialization of
P
x
P_{x}
matters and ultimately produces norm of error in
A
S
вҖӢ
M
A_{SM}
of
10
вҲ’
2
10^{-2}
(
pinv
) instead of
10
вҲ’
7
10^{-7}
(
solve
).
(a)
P
x
P_{x}
initialized using
pinv
.
(b)
P
x
P_{x}
initialized using
solve
.
Figure 15:
The error for updated
P
x
P_{x}
starts lower when initializing with
solve
. The error accumulates up to
10
вҲ’
2
10^{-2}
with
pinv
initialization, and only up to
10
вҲ’
6
10^{-6}
with
solve
. In both cases, it is worse than the errors of
вүҲ
10
вҲ’
13
\approx 10^{-13}
when updating using Cholesky factor in SM formula.
References
[1]
S. Akshay, K. P. Soman, N. Mohan, and S. Sachin Kumar
(2021)
Dynamic mode decomposition and its application in various domains: an overview
.
In
Applications in Ubiquitous Computing
,
R. Kumar and S. Paiva (Eds.)
,
pp.В 121вҖ“132
.
External Links:
ISBN 978-3-030-35280-6
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1
.
[2]
M. Y. Ali, A. Pandey, and J. W. Gregory
(2016)
Dynamic mode decomposition of fast pressure sensitive paint data
.
Sensors
16
(
6
).
External Links:
Link
,
ISSN 1424-8220
,
Document
Cited by:
В§1
.
[3]
A.M. Avila and I. MeziДҮ
(2020)
Data-driven analysis and forecasting of highway traffic dynamics
.
Nature Communications
11
(
2090
).
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§1
.
[4]
P. J. Baddoo, B. Herrmann, B. J. McKeon, K. J. Nathan, and S. L. Brunton
(2023-03)
Physics-informed dynamic mode decomposition
.
Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
479
(
2271
),
pp.В 20220576
.
External Links:
ISSN 1364-5021
,
Document
Cited by:
В§1
.
[5]
Г…. BjГ¶rck
(1994)
Numerics of gram-schmidt orthogonalization
.
Linear Algebra and its Applications
197-198
,
pp.В 297вҖ“316
.
External Links:
ISSN 0024-3795
,
Document
Cited by:
В§2.1.1
.
[6]
S. L. Brunton, M. BudiЕЎiДҮ, E. Kaiser, and J. N. Kutz
(2022)
Modern Koopman theory for dynamical systems
.
SIAM Review
64
(
2
),
pp.В 229вҖ“340
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
,
https://doi.org/10.1137/21M1401243
Cited by:
В§1
.
[7]
V. Chaugule, A. Duddridge, T. Sikroria, C. Atkinson, and J. Soria
(2023)
Investigating the linear dynamics of the near-field of a turbulent high-speed jet using dual-particle image velocimetry (piv) and dynamic mode decomposition (dmd)
.
Fluids
8
(
2
).
External Links:
Link
,
ISSN 2311-5521
,
Document
Cited by:
В§1
.
[8]
L. Chua
(1980)
Dynamic nonlinear networks: state-of-the-art
.
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems
27
(
11
),
pp.В 1059вҖ“1087
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§5.3.1
.
[9]
ChuaCircuits.com
(2025)
MATLAB simulation of chuaвҖҷs circuit
.
Note:
https://chuacircuits.com/matlab/
Accessed: 2026-03-09
Cited by:
В§5.3.1
.
[10]
Cited by:
В§4.4.1
.
[11]
W. T. Chung, B. Akoush, P. Sharma, A. Tamkin, K. S. Jung, J. H. Chen, J. Guo, D. Brouzet, M. Talei, B. Savard, A. Y. Poludnenko, and M. Ihme
(2023)
Turbulence in focus: Benchmarking scaling behavior of 3D volumetric super-resolution with BLASTNet 2.0 data
.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
36
.
Cited by:
В§4.4.1
.
[12]
M. J. Colbrook, Z. DrmaДҚ, and A. Horning
(2025-10)
An Introductory Guide to Koopman Learning
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp.В arXiv:2510.22002
.
External Links:
Document
,
2510.22002
Cited by:
В§1.1.2
.
[13]
S. T. M. Dawson, M. S. Hemati, M. O. Williams, and C. W. Rowley
(2016)
Characterizing and correcting for the effect of sensor noise in the dynamic mode decomposition
.
Experiments in Fluids
57
(
3
),
pp.В 42
.
External Links:
ISSN 1432-1114
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1.3
.
[14]
Z. DrmaДҚ, I. MeziДҮ, and R. Mohr
(2018)
Data driven modal decompositions: analysis and enhancements
.
SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing
40
(
4
),
pp.В A2253вҖ“A2285
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
,
https://doi.org/10.1137/17M1144155
Cited by:
В§1.1.1
,
В§1.1.1
,
В§1.3
.
[15]
Z. DrmaДҚ and I. MeziДҮ
(2024)
A data driven koopman-schur decomposition for computational analysis of nonlinear dynamics
.
External Links:
2312.15837
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1.3
.
[16]
Z. DrmaДҚ
(2024-03)
A LAPACK implementation of the Dynamic Mode Decomposition
.
ACM Trans. Math. Softw.
50
(
1
).
External Links:
ISSN 0098-3500
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
В§1.1.1
,
В§1.1.1
,
В§1.1.1
,
В§1.3
,
В§3.2
.
[17]
D. Giannakis and S. Das
(2020)
Extraction and prediction of coherent patterns in incompressible flows through spaceвҖ“time Koopman analysis
.
Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena
402
,
pp.В 132211
.
External Links:
ISSN 0167-2789
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1
.
[18]
B. S. Guevara, L. F. Recalde, J. Varela-AldГЎs, D. C. Gandolfo, and J. M. Toibero
(2023)
Quadcopters control using online dynamic mode decomposition
.
IFAC-PapersOnLine
56
(
3
),
pp.В 589вҖ“594
.
Note:
3rd Modeling, Estimation and Control Conference MECC 2023
External Links:
ISSN 2405-8963
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1.2
.
[19]
M. S. Hemati, M. O. Williams, and C. W. Rowley
(2014)
Dynamic mode decomposition for large and streaming datasets
.
Physics of Fluids
26
(
11
).
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§1.2
,
В§1.3
,
В§1.3
,
В§2.1.2
,
В§2.1.2
,
В§2
,
В§2
,
В§3.2
,
В§3
,
В§3
,
Remark 1
,
footnote 2
.
[20]
N. J. Higham
(2002)
Accuracy and stability of numerical algorithms
.
Second edition
,
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
,
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
,
https://epubs.siam.org/doi/pdf/10.1137/1.9780898718027
Cited by:
Remark 4
.
[21]
R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson
(1990)
Matrix analysis
.
Cambridge University Press
.
Cited by:
В§3.1.1
.
[22]
Q. A. Huhn, M. E. Tano, J. C. Ragusa, and Y. Choi
(2023)
Parametric dynamic mode decomposition for reduced order modeling
.
Journal of Computational Physics
475
,
pp.В 111852
.
External Links:
ISSN 0021-9991
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1.2
.
[23]
M. R. JovanoviДҮ, P. J. Schmid, and J. W. Nichols
(2012)
LowвҖ“rank and sparse dynamic mode decomposition
.
Center for Turbulence Research, Annual Research Briefs
,
pp.В 139вҖ“152
.
Note:
Low-rank and sparsity promoting DMD
Cited by:
В§1
.
[24]
M. R. JovanoviДҮ, P. J. Schmid, and J. W. Nichols
(2014)
Sparsity-promoting dynamic mode decomposition
.
Phys. Fluids
26
(
2
),
pp.В 024103 (22 pages)
.
Cited by:
В§1.1.2
,
В§1.3
,
В§1
.
[25]
J. N. Kutz, S. L. Brunton, B. W. Brunton, and J. L. Proctor
Dynamic mode decomposition вҖ“ supplementary material
.
Note:
http://dmdbook.com/
Cited by:
Example 2.1
.
[26]
J. N. Kutz, S. L. Brunton, B. W. Brunton, and J. L. Proctor
(2016)
Dynamic mode decomposition
.
edition
,
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
,
Philadelphia, PA
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1
,
Example 2.1
.
[27]
X. Li and J. Deng
(2024)
Active control of the flow past a circular cylinder using online dynamic mode decomposition
.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics
997
,
pp.В A26
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§1.2
.
[28]
J. Liew, T. GГ¶Г§men, W. H. Lio, and G. C. Larsen
(2022)
Streaming dynamic mode decomposition for short-term forecasting in wind farms
.
Wind Energy
25
(
4
),
pp.В 719вҖ“734
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§1.2
.
[29]
L. Ma, C. Boutsikas, M. Ghadiri, and P. Drineas
(2025)
A note on the stability of the Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury formula
.
External Links:
2504.04554
,
Link
Cited by:
В§5.2
.
[30]
D. Matsumoto and T. Indinger
(2017-03)
On-the-fly algorithm for Dynamic Mode Decomposition using Incremental Singular Value Decomposition and Total Least Squares
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp.В arXiv:1703.11004
.
External Links:
Document
,
1703.11004
Cited by:
В§1.2
.
[31]
T. Matsumoto
(1984)
A chaotic attractor from chuaвҖҷs circuit
.
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems
31
(
12
),
pp.В 1055вҖ“1058
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§5.3.1
.
[32]
C. D. Meyer
(1973)
Generalized inversion of modified matrices
.
SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics
24
(
3
),
pp.В 315вҖ“323
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
,
https://doi.org/10.1137/0124033
Cited by:
В§5.1.1
.
[33]
I. MeziДҮ, Z. DrmaДҚ, N. ДҢrnjariДҮ, M. S., M. Fonoberova, R. Mohr, A. Avila, I. ManojloviДҮ, and A. AndrejДҚuk
(2024)
A koopman operator-based prediction algorithm and its application to covid-19 pandemic and influenza cases
.
Scientific Reports
14
,
pp.В 5788
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1.1
.
[34]
I. MeziДҮ
(2005)
Spectral properties of dynamical systems, model reduction and decompositions
.
Nonlinear Dynamics
41
,
pp.В 309вҖ“325
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§1.1
.
[35]
I. MeziДҮ
(2013)
Analysis of fluid flows via spectral properties of the Koopman operator
.
Annual Reviews of Fluid Mechanics
45
,
pp.В 357вҖ“378
.
Cited by:
В§1
.
[36]
I. MeziДҮ
(2020)
Spectrum of the Koopman operator, spectral expansions in functional spaces, and stateвҖ“space geometry
.
Nonlinear Science
30
(
5
),
pp.В 2091вҖ“2145
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§1.1
.
[37]
M. Mignacca, S. Brugiapaglia, and J.J. Bramburger
(2025)
Real-time motion detection using dynamic mode decomposition
.
J Image Video Proc
10
,
pp.В 1вҖ“18
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§1.2
.
[38]
G. Nedzhibov
(2023)
Extended online dmd and weighted modifications for streaming data analysis
.
Computation
11
(
6
).
External Links:
Link
,
ISSN 2079-3197
,
Document
Cited by:
В§1.2
.
[39]
C. W. Rowley, I. MeziДҮ, S. Bagheri, P. Schlatter, and D. S. Henningson
(2009)
Spectral analysis of nonlinear flows
.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics
641
,
pp.В 115вҖ“127
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§1
.
[40]
T. Ryu, W. H. Ali, P. J. Haley, C. Mirabito, A. Charous, and P. F. J. Lermusiaux
(2022)
Incremental low-rank dynamic mode decomposition model for efficient forecast dissemination and onboard forecasting
.
In
OCEANS 2022, Hampton Roads
,
Vol.
,
pp.В 1вҖ“8
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§1.2
.
[41]
T. Sayadi, P. J. Schmid, F. Richecoeur, and D. Durox
(2015-03)
Parametrized data-driven decomposition for bifurcation analysis, with application to thermo-acoustically unstable systems
.
Physics of Fluids
27
(
3
),
pp.В 037102
.
External Links:
ISSN 1070-6631
,
Document
Cited by:
В§1.1.2
.
[42]
P. J. Schmid, L. Li, M. P. Juniper, and O. Pust
(2011)
Applications of the dynamic mode decomposition
.
Theoretical and Computational Fluid Dynamics
25
(
1
),
pp.В 249вҖ“259
.
External Links:
ISSN 1432-2250
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1
.
[43]
P. J. Schmid and J. Sesterhenn
(2008)
Dynamic Mode Decomposition of numerical and experimental data
.
Bull. Amer. Phys. Soc., 61st APS meeting, San Antonio.
,
pp.В 208
.
Cited by:
В§1
.
[44]
P. J. Schmid
(2010)
Dynamic mode decomposition of numerical and experimental data
.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics
656
,
pp.В 5вҖ“28
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§1
.
[45]
P. J. Schmid
(2011)
Application of the dynamic mode decomposition to experimental data
.
Experiments in Fluids
50
(
4
),
pp.В 1123вҖ“1130
.
External Links:
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
В§1
.
[46]
P. J. Schmid
(2021)
DataвҖ“driven and operatorвҖ“based tools for the analysis of turbulent flows
.
In
Advanced Approaches in Turbulence
,
P. Durbin (Ed.)
,
pp.В 243вҖ“305
.
External Links:
ISBN 978-0-12-820774-1
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1
.
[47]
P. J. Schmid
(2022)
Dynamic mode decomposition and its variants
.
Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics
54
(
1
),
pp.В 225вҖ“254
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
,
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-fluid-030121-015835
Cited by:
В§1
.
[48]
S. W. Suh, S. W. Chung, P.-T. Bremer, and Y. Choi
(2023-11)
Accelerating Flow Simulations using Online Dynamic Mode Decomposition
.
arXiv e-prints
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§1.2
.
[49]
J. H. Tu, C. W. Rowley, D. M. Luchtenburg, S. L. Brunton, and J. N. Kutz
(2014)
On dynamic mode decomposition: theory and applications
.
Journal of Computational Dynamics
1
(
2
),
pp.В 391вҖ“421
.
Cited by:
В§1.1.1
,
В§1
,
В§3.2
.
[50]
U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration
(2016)
Next Generation Simulation (NGSIM) Vehicle Trajectories and Supporting Data
.
Note:
http://doi.org/10.21949/1504477
Dataset provided by ITS DataHub through Data.transportation.gov. Accessed 2025-07-12
Cited by:
В§1
.
[51]
M. O. Williams, I. G. Kevrekidis, and C. W. Rowley
(2015-06)
A dataвҖ“driven approximation of the koopman operator: extending dynamic mode decomposition
.
Journal of Nonlinear Science
25
(
6
),
pp.В 1307вҖ“1346
.
External Links:
ISSN 1432-1467
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
В§1
.
[52]
A. Wynn, D. S. Pearson, B. Ganapathisubramani, and P. J. Goulart
(2013)
Optimal mode decomposition for unsteady flows
.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics
733
,
pp.В 473вҖ“503
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§1.3
.
[53]
R. Yang, X. Zhang, P. Reiter, D. Lohse, O. Shishkina, and M. Linkmann
(2022)
Data-driven identification of the spatiotemporal structure of turbulent flows by streaming dynamic mode decomposition
.
GAMM-Mitteilungen
45
(
1
),
pp.В e202200003
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§3
.
[54]
H. Zhang, C. W. Rowley, E. A. Deem, and L. N. Cattafesta
(2019)
Online dynamic mode decomposition for time-varying systems
.
SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems
18
(
3
),
pp.В 1586вҖ“1609
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§1.2
,
В§1.3
,
В§1.3
,
В§5.1
,
В§5.1
,
Remark 8
.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA