JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2604.05237v1 [astro-ph.CO] 06 Apr 2026
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
A. M. Nierenberg
anierenberg@ucmerced.edu
University of California, Merced, 5200 N Lake Road, Merced, CA 95341, USA
D. Gilman
Department of Astronomy
&
\&
Astrophysics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
Brinson Prize Fellow
T. Treu
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA
X. Du
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA
C. Gannon
University of California, Merced, 5200 N Lake Road, Merced, CA 95341, USA
H. Paugnat
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA
S. Birrer
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA
A. J. Benson
Carnegie Institution for Science, Pasadena CA 91101, USA
K. N. Abazajian
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-4575, USA
T. Anguita
Instituto de Astrofisica, Departamento de Ciencias Fisicas, Universidad Andres Bello, Chile
Millennium Institute of Astrophysics, Chile
S. G. Djorgovski
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena CA 91125, USA
S. F. Hoenig
School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom
R. E. Keeley
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-4575, USA
A. Kusenko
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA
Kavli Institute for the Physics and Mathematics of the Universe (WPI), UTIAS, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8583, Japan
H. R. Larsson
University of California, Merced, 5200 N Lake Road, Merced, CA 95341, USA
L. A. Moustakas
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Dr, Pasadena, CA 91109
P.  Mozumdar
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA
W. Sheu
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA
D. Sluse
STAR Institute, University of Liège, Quartier Agora - Allée du six Août, 19c B-4000 Liège, Belgium
D. Stern
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Dr, Pasadena, CA 91109
D. Williams
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA
K. C. Wong
Research Center for the Early Universe, Graduate School of Science, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
Abstract
We explore the lowest mass limit that can be placed on the halo mass function in CDM using 28 strong gravitational lenses. For this purpose, we study an extreme model in which the halo mass function and mass-concentration relation follow CDM, with a sharp cutoff at some mass scale,
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
.
Lensing provides a unique window into this quantity as it does not depend on the presence of baryons in dark matter halos and also allows the detection of low mass halos at cosmological distances, both in the lens galaxies and along the line-of-sight. Our model incorporates the effects of tidal stripping of subhalos, leading to the presence of many subhalos below a given model cutoff scale. We place an upper limit on the low-mass cutoff of the halo mass function of
m
low
<
10
8.3
m_{\mathrm{low}}<10^{8.3}
M
⊙
at 10:1 odds using a prior for the normalization of the subhalo mass function from the semi-analytic model
galacticus
and
m
low
<
10
8.2
m_{\mathrm{low}}<10^{8.2}
M
⊙
at 10:1 odds using a prior from
N
N
-body simulations. These limits are comparable to, or stronger than, existing constraints based on Milky Way satellite galaxies. Based on these results, we forecast more than an order of magnitude improvement with a sample of 200 quadruply imaged quasar lenses. This number represents a small subset of the thousands that are anticipated to be discovered by Rubin, Euclid, and Roman. Furthermore, with this larger sample of lenses we expect to directly constrain the normalization of the subhalo mass function, thereby eliminating a major source of uncertainty in our current measurements.
dark matter – gravitational lensing: strong – quasars: general
Introduction
—Early high-resolution dark matter
N
N
-Body simulations of Cold Dark Matter (CDM) structure made a key prediction: that there must be a significant number of completely dark subhalos around the Milky Way
[
13
,
36
,
27
,
31
]
. This was based on the CDM model prediction that there should be thousands of subhalos around the Milky Way, in comparison with only tens of known Milky Way satellites.
Since that time, the number of known low-mass satellite galaxies in the Local Group has dramatically increased thanks to modern all-sky surveys which have discovered satellites down to stellar masses of
∼
\sim
1000
M
⊙
M_{\odot}
(see e.g.
[
15
]
and references therein for a review). Although direct mass estimates of the dark matter halos of these objects are highly uncertain, as these satellites contain few stars for which kinematics can be measured, and the stars occupy only the central tens of parsecs of the dark matter halos
[
6
]
,
they can still be used to constrain the properties of dark matter through abundance matching. Abundance matching studies compare the predicted number of dark matter halos from high-resolution simulations to the known satellites of the Milky Way to place limits on the scale at which dark matter halos must exist around our Galaxy, thereby bypassing the need for a direct measurement of the subhalo mass function. An accurate estimate of the completeness of observations of satellite galaxies is crucial to these measurements
[
51
,
30
,
37
]
.
Nadler
et al.
[
37
]
used abundance matching to place an upper limit on the lowest mass halos that must exist, prior to the effects of tidal stripping, of
∼
\sim
10
8.4
M
⊙
.
Gravitational lensing provides a means of extending the measurement of the halo mass function to cosmological volumes, as it relies on the total mass of objects and does not require the detection of luminous structure
[
11
,
34
,
52
]
. Recent measurements, using a combination of quasar mid-IR and narrow-line emission flux ratios, have placed some of the strongest limits to date on a Warm Dark Matter (WDM) turnover in the halo mass function
[
22
]
. In this work, we seek to address a different question: the extent to which gravitational lenses can place limits on the lowest mass halos. We adopt an empirical model in which we assume the CDM prediction for the mass-concentration relation and mass function down to a sharp cutoff at some lower mass limit at all redshifts. This model is not tied to any realistic particle model of dark matter, which would, among other things, predict an evolution of the low mass limit with redshift, and does not reproduce the CDM mass-concentration relation. Instead, the model enables us to determine in a robust and conservative manner the minimum mass scale at which current strong lensing measurements
can confirm a fundamental prediction of CDM, namely that a population of low-mass halos devoid of luminous matter exists throughout the Universe.
Strong lensing dark matter detection
—
In a strong gravitational lens, the image positions and relative image magnifications are determined by the gravitational potential. Small perturbations to the main lens mass distribution in the form of low-mass structure in the lens and along the line of sight can significantly alter the relative image magnifications relative to a smooth mass expectation while leaving the positions unchanged. Two decades ago, several works noted that the sensitivity of strong lenses with unresolved sources to low-mass halos could be used to study dark matter substructure
[
11
,
34
]
. With the advent of new instruments enabling spatially resolved spectroscopy
[
42
,
41
,
39
]
and measurements of quasar warm dust emission
[
40
,
29
,
28
]
the sample of lenses to which we can apply this method has increased by a factor of three.
Data
—
We study the 28 lenses from the James Webb Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey
[
40
]
. This sample was selected from all quadruply imaged quasars with measured microlensing-free flux ratios, which do not contain a significant disk deflector. These include 2 lenses with narrow-line emission
[
42
,
39
]
, and 26 lenses with warm dust flux ratios measured with JWST as part of program GO-2046 (PI Nierenberg)
[
40
,
28
]
. While the flux ratios provide a highly sensitive probe of small scale perturbations due to low-mass halos, imaging of the quasar host galaxy can significantly improve the constraining power by reducing uncertainty on the large-scale mass distribution of the deflector, as demonstrated by
Gilman
et al.
[
20
,
22
]
. In this work, we use the same imaging data set and statistical approach described in detail in
Gilman
et al.
[
22
]
to incorporate information from the imaging data into the inference of dark matter parameters. We summarize key aspects of the method here.
Macromodel
—
We model the large-scale, mass distribution of the lens, or macromodel following the current state of the art in the field, which is a power-law ellipsoid mass distribution with
m
=
1
,
3
,
4
m=1,3,4
multipoles, and external shear. When detected, we also include luminous companion galaxies close in proximity to the lensed images modeled as Singular Isothermal Spheres. Priors on lens model parameters were selected based on the known properties of strong lenses from
[
5
]
and massive elliptical galaxies
[
25
,
44
]
as outlined in detail by
Gilman
et al.
[
22
]
. Traditionally, only the image positions have been used to constrain the mass distribution of the deflector. We follow
Gilman
et al.
[
22
]
in also incorporating lensed arc information, when available, to constrain the macromodel, as described below.
Dark matter model
— We investigate the joint signal of dark matter halos in the lens (subhalos) and along the line of sight (field halos). Field halos are drawn from a modified Sheth-Tormen mass function
[
49
]
:
d
2
​
N
d
​
m
​
d
​
V
=
δ
LOS
​
[
1
+
ξ
​
(
m
host
,
z
d
)
]
​
d
2
​
N
ST
d
​
m
​
d
​
V
.
\frac{\mathrm{d}^{2}N}{\mathrm{d}m\mathrm{d}V}=\delta_{\rm{LOS}}\left[1+\xi\left(m_{\rm{host}},z_{\rm{d}}\right)\right]\frac{\mathrm{d}^{2}N_{\rm{ST}}}{\mathrm{d}m\mathrm{d}V}.
(1)
Where
N
N
is the model predicted number of halos,
N
ST
N_{\rm{ST}}
is the number of halos predicted by the Sheth-Torman mass function, while
ξ
\xi
accounts for correlated structure following
Lazar
et al.
[
33
]
. In addition, we allow for potentially over- or under-dense sightlines via the dark matter model parameter
δ
LOS
\delta_{\rm{LOS}}
, which is sampled between 0.9 and 1.1, with 1 being the Sheth-Tormen prediction.
Halos are drawn from this mass function between a lower mass limit of
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
, which is a sampled dark matter model parameter and a fixed upper limit of
10
10.7
10^{10.7}
M
⊙
. The upper limit of the mass function corresponds to the halo mass at which we expect to detect luminous satellites embedded in the dark matter halos, given the observation depth. Such halos are explicitly included in our analysis with steeper, Singular Isothermal Sphere density profiles to account for the effects of baryons.
The lower limit,
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
, is the parameter under investigation in this study. It represents an absolute cutoff in the halo mass function at all redshifts. This is not motivated by realistic particle physics or structure formation model but instead provides a limiting estimate of the sensitivity of the data to the presence low mass halos. We allow this to vary between
6
<
log
10
⁡
[
m
low
/
M
⊙
]
<
10
6<\log_{10}[m_{\mathrm{low}}/\rm{M}_{\odot}]<10
. The lower value of the allowed range is our estimated sensitivity floor to for a population of halos to produce a measurable flux ratio anomaly given the current number of lenses, lens modeling uncertainties and flux measurement uncertainties.
Subhalos are halos which have been accreted into the larger virial radius of the main lens dark matter halo. The subhalo mass function at infall (prior to the effects of tidal stripping) is modeled as:
d
2
​
N
d
​
m
​
d
​
A
=
Σ
sub
m
0
​
(
m
m
0
)
−
α
​
ℱ
​
(
m
host
,
z
)
.
\frac{\mathrm{d}^{2}N}{\mathrm{d}m\mathrm{d}A}=\frac{\Sigma_{\rm{sub}}}{m_{0}}\left(\frac{m}{m_{0}}\right)^{-\alpha}\mathcal{F}\left(m_{\rm{host}},z\right).
(2)
The logarithmic slope of the subhalo mass function,
α
\alpha
, is varied between 0.9–1.1, which encompasses both the prediction from pure dark matter simulations as well as the possible impact of baryons
[
24
,
50
,
18
,
8
,
19
]
.
Σ
sub
\Sigma_{\rm{sub}}
is the normalization of the subhalo mass function at 10
8
M
⊙
for a 10
13
M
⊙
host halo at redshift 0.5 and
ℱ
​
(
m
host
,
z
)
\mathcal{F}\left(m_{\rm{host}},z\right)
represents the scaling of the subhalo mass function with host halo mass and redshift:
ℱ
​
(
m
host
,
z
)
=
(
m
host
/
10
13
​
M
⊙
)
k
1
​
(
z
+
0.5
)
k
2
,
\mathcal{F}\left(m_{\rm{host}},z\right)=\left(m_{\rm{host}}/10^{13}\mathrm{M}_{\odot}\right)^{k_{1}}\left(z+0.5\right)^{k_{2}},
(3)
with
k
1
=
0.55
k_{1}=0.55
and
k
2
=
0.37
k_{2}=0.37
measured from
[
19
]
.
The logarithm of the host halo mass is sampled over a Gaussian prior with
log
10
[
m
host
/
M
⊙
\log_{10}[m_{\rm{host}}/\rm{M}_{\odot}
] having a mean of 13.3 and standard deviation of 0.3 based on the measurement of halo mass distribution for a sample of representative galaxy-scale strong lenses by
Lagattuta
et al.
[
32
]
.
Subhalos undergo significant tidal interactions as they are accreted into the main lensing halo. We use the analytic framework developed by
Du
et al.
[
17
]
to statistically model the subhalo tidal evolution as a function of key parameters, including infall time and subhalo concentration. As with other state of the art subhalo evolution models, this model predicts that typical subhalos in the projected
∼
\sim
5 arcseconds of strong lens-like halos have lost about 95% of their mass since infall. Owing to these effects, our forward modeling simulations contain many subhalos with final masses significantly lower than the field halo cutoff of
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
.
Current
N
N
-body simulations and semi-analytic models differ in their predictions for the amplitude of the subhalo mass function by a factor of two
[
19
]
. To account for this theoretical uncertainty, we explore two different priors on the projected normalization of the subhalo mass function,
Σ
sub
\Sigma_{\rm{sub}}
, one reflecting the prediction from
N
N
-body simulations and one from the semi-analytic model
galacticus
[
7
,
54
,
16
]
.
Table 1:
Description of the dark matter hyper-parameters.
Hyper-parameter
Description
Sampling distribution
Remarks
δ
LOS
\delta_{\rm{LOS}}
rescales the amplitude of the
𝒰
​
(
0.9
,
1.1
)
\mathcal{U}\left(0.9,1.1\right)
δ
LOS
=
1
\delta_{\rm{LOS}}=1
corresponds to the
field halo mass function
Sheth–Tormen prediction
α
\alpha
logarithmic slope of the
𝒰
​
(
−
1.95
,
−
1.85
)
\mathcal{U}\left(-1.95,-1.85\right)
CDM predicts
α
∼
−
1.9
\alpha\sim-1.9
subhalo mass function at infall
Σ
sub
​
[
kpc
−
2
]
\Sigma_{\rm{sub}}\ \left[\rm{kpc^{-2}}\right]
amplitude of the differential
log
10
⁡
𝒰
​
(
−
2.2
,
0.2
)
\log_{10}\mathcal{U}\left(-2.2,0.2\right)
N
N
-body predicts
∼
0.1
​
kpc
−
2
\sim 0.1\ \rm{kpc^{-2}}
subhalo mass function at infall
galacticus
predicts
∼
0.15
​
kpc
−
2
\sim 0.15\ \rm{kpc^{-2}}
m
low
​
[
M
⊙
]
m_{\rm{low}}\left[\mathrm{M}_{\odot}\right]
field halo cutoff
log
10
⁡
𝒰
​
(
6.0
,
10
)
\log_{10}\mathcal{U}\left(6.0,10\right)
Dark matter forward modeling
—
The details of the statistical model we use are laid out in
Gilman
et al.
[
22
]
. We use a forward modeling approach to draw realizations of dark matter halos from the dark matter model parameters as well as to sample over the lens mass distribution (macromodel parameters) described previously. For each realization of dark matter and macromodel parameters, we compute the model-predicted image magnifications, which are compared to observed magnifications to compute a relative likelihood for that set of parameters. We use
lenstronomy
[
9
,
10
]
to perform gravitational lensing calculations and to optimize free lens parameters to match the image positions for each dark matter realization. A detailed description of how the lensing calculation is computed to ensure matching to image positions is provided by
Gilman
et al.
[
22
]
. We generate between 0.5–20 million samples per lens to ensure convergence.
We also incorporate information from the lensed quasar host galaxy, when detected. This information was included via a separate suite of simulations. In these simulations, we generate realizations from the dark matter and macromodel parameters in an identical way to the previous step and require that the image positions be matched. The difference in this step was that for every realization, we use the macromodel to also compute the full ray tracing for the lensed quasar host galaxy and compute the likelihood for the imaging data for each realization. We then marginalize over the sampled dark matter parameters to compute the likelihood distribution of the lens mass model parameters, given the imaging data. These likelihoods are independent of the flux ratios and rely only on the goodness of fit to the imaging data and lensed quasar positions. The likelihoods are then applied as weights to the full forward modeling simulations calculated in the first steps, so that forward model iterations with macromodel parameters favored by the imaging only analysis are given preferential weight in the final analysis. By decoupling the imaging analysis from the flux ratio computation in the first step, we are able to efficiently sample over many sets of macromodel parameters. We find that the macromodel parameter weights are well estimated with about two hundred thousand realizations per lens.
In the final step of the statistical inference, we apply the likelihood weights estimated in the second set of simulations to the realizations generated in the first step so that each realization is weighted by the likelihood of both the flux ratios and the macromodel parameters.
The statistical methods used in this work have been validated on mock data and have been shown to accurately recover properties of the halo mass function for a variety of dark matter scenarios
[
20
]
in the presence of realistic, complex macromodels.
Results
—
Figure
1
shows the posterior probability distribution for the dark matter parameters
Σ
sub
\Sigma_{\rm{sub}}
, and
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
, marginalizing over
α
\alpha
and
δ
los
\delta_{\rm{los}}
which were not well constrained. We show the result for three choices of prior for the normalization of the subhalo mass function.
The most agnostic prior is a uniform prior for
log
10
⁡
Σ
sub
\log_{10}\Sigma_{\rm{sub}}
between
−
2.2
-2.2
and 0.2. This prior extends approximately a factor of 10 above and below the predictions from both
N
N
-body simulations and
galacticus
. For this prior we measure
m
low
<
10
8.6
m_{\mathrm{low}}<10^{8.6}
M
⊙
at 10:1 Bayesian odds, and
m
low
<
10
8.4
m_{\mathrm{low}}<10^{8.4}
M
⊙
at 95% confidence. Adopting more informative priors, we infer
m
low
<
10
8.3
m_{\mathrm{low}}<10^{8.3}
(
10
8.1
10^{8.1}
) M
⊙
at 10:1 odds (95% confidence) using the prior for
Σ
sub
\Sigma_{\rm{sub}}
based on
galacticus
and
m
low
<
10
8.2
m_{\mathrm{low}}<10^{8.2}
(
10
7.9
10^{7.9}
) M
⊙
at 10:1 odds (95% confidence) using the prior from
N
N
-body simulations.
Figure 1:
The joint posterior probability distribution for a cutoff in the halo mass function (
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
), and normalization of the projected subhalo mass function (
Σ
sub
\Sigma_{\rm{sub}}
), shown for three different priors on
Σ
sub
\Sigma_{\rm{sub}}
, jointly inferred from 28 lenses. One-sided
95
%
95\%
exclusion limits, and 10:1 Bayes factor constraints taken with respect to the peak of the marginal distribution, are summarized in the top right. Contours show
68
%
68\%
and
95
%
95\%
confidence regions.
These are among the strongest limits measured to date on the minimum mass scale at which dark matter halos. They are comparable to existing limits from Milky Way satellite galaxies by
Nadler
et al.
[
37
]
who report
m
low
<
10
8.8
m_{\mathrm{low}}<10^{8.8}
at 95% confidence, using spectroscopically confirmed Milky Way satellites. Including satellites that are not spectroscopically confirmed strengthens the constraint to
m
low
<
10
8.4
m_{\mathrm{low}}<10^{8.4}
M
⊙
M_{\odot}
at 95% confidence.
Direct comparison between these two studies posses some complexity. First, the prior ranges on
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
used in the two analyses are different, therefore the 95% confidence intervals are not directly comparable. Second, limits from
Nadler
et al.
[
37
]
are based exclusively on subhalos and are relative to the peak mass that subhalo ever reached. Given that subhalos lose mass over an extended period of time prior to infall, the connection between mass definitions between the mass at infall and the peak infall mass can differ by up to 40%
[
1
]
. To some extent this uncertainty is captured by our two priors on the normalization of the subhalo mass function. The
galacticus
model does not account for pre-infall tidal stripping while the
N
N
-body prior does. These differences are also mitigated by the fact that our measurement probes both line-of-sight halos as well as subhalos. In summary, we do not aim to directly compare the stringency of these two measurements, only to demonstrate that both gravitational lensing and Milky Way satellite counts measurements indicate the existence of a significant population of dark matter halos at masses of 10
8.5
M
⊙
.
The limits presented here for a cutoff in the halo mass function are comparatively higher than the limits for a Warm Dark Matter half-mode mass found using the same lens sample presented in our previous work
[
22
]
. In that work, we found limits of
m
hm
<
10
7.4
m_{\rm{hm}}<10^{7.4}
, (
m
hm
<
10
7.2
m_{\rm{hm}}<10^{7.2}
) based on the 10:1 odds ratio, using a prior on
Σ
sub
\Sigma_{\rm{sub}}
based on
galacticus
(
N
N
-body simulations).
To develop intuition for how these limits compare we can consider the two competing effects. On the one hand, the sharp cutoff model studied here has no field halos at all below the cutoff mass, whereas in WDM models, there are still a significant number of low-mass halos below the half-mode mass. This would tend to mean that the value of
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
would need to be lower to produce a fixed amount of lensing signal. On the other hand, strong lenses are sensitive to the internal densities of halos
[e.g.
23
,
23
,
35
,
12
]
, with denser halos causing relatively larger perturbations at fixed total halo mass. Because the concentrations of warm dark matter halos are systematically lower in WDM than in CDM, even up to a factor of ten above the half-mode mass, they are less efficient lenses and thus have a lower probability of perturbing a lensed image. Furthermore, the lower concentrations make subhalos more prone to tidal disruption at higher masses, further decreasing the probability that a WDM halo perturbs a lens. The effect of concentrations has the opposite effect to the lower number of small mass halos, it tends to mean that a higher value of
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
can produce a given lensing signal because the low mass halos are more effective lenses. The fact that the inference on
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
is weaker than that on
m
hm
m_{\rm{hm}}
would suggest that the concentration difference between the CDM and
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
models is the dominant of these two effects.
We provide a qualitative exploration of these effects in Figure
2
by showing how the image fluxes for a mock lens are perturbed in a WDM model with
m
hm
=
10
9
m_{\rm{hm}}=10^{9}
M
⊙
, and a CDM model with a cutoff in the field halo mass function
m
low
=
10
9
m_{\rm{low}}=10^{9}
M
⊙
and finally a CDM model. We note that this example does not map in a trivial way into an expected dark matter constraint for the two models as this would require a measurement of a ‘true’ flux ratio for this system as well as multiplication of probability distributions over many mock systems.
However, the larger spread in the flux ratios for the
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
model relative to the WDM model demonstrates that the
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
dark matter halos are more likely to cause a significant perturbation to the measured flux ratios than the WDM halos, highlighting that they are more effective lenses for fixed value of
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
and
m
hm
m_{\rm{hm}}
.
As expected, the additional low mass halos in the true CDM model further broaden the flux ratio distribution relative to the
m
low
=
10
9
m_{\rm{low}}=10^{9}
M
⊙
model.
Figure 2:
Comparison of the flux ratio distribution for a mock cusp lens for three different dark matter scenarios; a warm dark matter model with a half-mode-mass
m
hm
=
10
9
m_{\rm hm}=10^{9}
M
⊙
, a CDM-like model with a sharp cutoff at
m
low
=
10
9
m_{\rm{low}}=10^{9}
M
⊙
and a CDM model with no detectable cutoff. All other dark matter parameters, are held fixed between the simulations. The
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
model predicts a broader spread of flux ratios than the WDM model, providing a qualitative demonstration of the relative importance of the higher concentrations of
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
subhalos in perturbing the lensed images. Vertical bars indicate the 95% confidence interval.
Figure 3:
Forecast 10:1 posterior odds ratio limit on
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
as a function of the number of quadruply imaged quasars in the sample. Spread indicates the 68% confidence interval from bootstrap resampling while colors represent prior choices on
Σ
sub
\Sigma_{\rm{sub}}
. The impact of the informative priors relative to a uniform prior decreases significantly with more than 100 lenses. With about 200 lenses, we forecast a constraint of
m
low
≲
10
7
m_{\mathrm{low}}\lesssim 10^{7}
M
⊙
\odot
.
Future constraints
— Thousands of new strong gravitational lenses are forecast to be discovered in the next decade between LSST, Euclid, and Roman
[
43
]
, with
∼
\sim
200 quadruply imaged quasars readily observable in the next 5 years based on the expected year one depth of LSST. We use the existing constraints in this work to forecast the projected constraints with additional gravitational lenses. We simulate future observations by bootstrap resampling from the current individual lens posteriors. Figure
3
shows the projected constraints for up to 200 lenses. Bootstrapping is performed by drawing randomly from the current lens posterior probability distributions. Contours represent the 68% confidence interval for 50 randomly drawn samples of lenses. Beyond 120 quadruply imaged quasars, the prior on
Σ
sub
\Sigma_{\rm{sub}}
becomes significantly less important. With 200 lenses, we forecast a constraint on
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
≲
10
7
\lesssim 10^{7}
M
⊙
.
In addition to new lenses, the combination of this data set with other complementary data sets can greatly strengthen the combined analysis. In particular,
[
38
]
demonstrated that constraints from Milky Way satellites, combined with strong lensing measurements significantly improved the constraint on the dark matter half mode mass. In the near future the constraint on
m
low
m_{\mathrm{low}}
can be improved by such a comparison.
Acknowledgments
We thank Eric Huff and Ethan Nadler for helpful discussions.
DG acknowledges support for this work provided by the Brinson Foundation through a Brinson Prize Fellowship grant.
AMN and CG acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation through the grant “CAREER: An order of magnitude improvement in measurements of the physical properties of dark matter" NSF-AST-2442975.
TT, XD and HP acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation through the grant “Collaborative Research: Measuring the physical properties of dark matter with strong gravitational lensing" NSF-AST-2205100.
DW acknowledges support by NSF through grants NSF-AST-1906976 and NSF-AST-1836016, and from the Moore Foundation through grant 8548.
D. Sluse acknowledges the support of the Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique-FNRS, Belgium, under grant No. 4.4503.1 and the Belgian Federal Science Policy Office (BELSPO) for the provision of financial support in the framework of the PRODEX Programme of the European Space Agency (ESA) under contract number 4000142531.
P.M. acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation through grant NSF-AST-2407277.
SB acknowledges support by the Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook University, and by DoE Grant DE-SC0026113.
TA acknowledges support from ANID-FONDECYT Regular Project 1240105 and the ANID BASAL project FB210003.
KNA is partially supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) Theoretical Physics Program Grant No. PHY-2210283.
SGD acknowledges a generous support from the Ajax Foundation.
SFH acknowledges support through UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) under the UK government’s Horizon Europe Funding Guarantee (EP/Z533920/1, selected in the 2023 ERC Advanced Grant round) and an STFC Small Award (ST/Y001656/1).
A. K. was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Grant No. DE-SC0009937; by World Premier International Research Center Initiative (WPI), MEXT, Japan; and by Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) KAKENHI Grant No. JP20H05853.
Part of this work was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a contract with NASA.
K.C.W. is supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers JP24K07089, JP24H00221.
This work is based on observations made with the James Webb Space Telescope through the Cycle 1 program JWST GO-2046 (PI:Nierenberg), and the Hubble Space Telescope through HST-GO-15320, HST-GO-15652, HST-GO-17916 (PI:Treu) and HST-GO-13732 (PI:Nierenberg). Funding from NASA through these programs is gratefully acknowledged.
Some of the data presented herein were obtained at Keck Observatory, which is a private 501(c)3 non-profit organization operated as a scientific partnership among the California Institute of Technology, the University of California, and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. The Keck facilities we used were LRIS and OSIRIS. The Observatory was made possible by the generous financial support of the W. M. Keck Foundation. The authors wish to recognize and acknowledge the very significant cultural role and reverence that the summit of Maunakea has always had within the Native Hawaiian community. We are most fortunate to have the opportunity to conduct observations from this mountain.
This research is based in part on data collected at the Subaru Telescope, which is operated by the National Astronomical Observatory of Japan. We are honored and grateful for the opportunity of observing the Universe from Maunakea, which has cultural, historical, and natural significance in Hawaii.
This work used computational and storage services provided by the University of Chicago’s Research Computing Center; Caltech’s Resnick High Performance Computing Center through Carnegie Science’s partnership; the Pinnacles (NSF MRI,
#
\#
2019144) and CENVAL-ARC (NSF
#
\#
2346744) computing clusters at the Cyberinfrastructure and Research Technologies (CIRT) at University of California, Merced; and the Hoffman2 Cluster which is operated by the UCLA Office of Advanced Research Computing’s Research Technology Group. This research was done using services provided by the OSG Consortium
[
45
,
48
]
, which is supported by the National Science Foundation awards
#
\#
2030508 and
#
\#
2323298.
Software
This work made use of
astropy
:
1
1
1
http://www.astropy.org
a community-developed core Python package and an ecosystem of tools and resources for astronomy
[
4
,
2
,
3
]
;
cobyqa
[
47
,
46
]
;
colossus
[
14
]
;
lenstronomy
2
2
2
https://github.com/lenstronomy/lenstronomy
[
9
,
10
]
;
numpy
[
26
]
;
pyHalo
3
3
3
https://github.com/dangilman/pyHalo
[
21
]
;
trikde
4
4
4
https://github.com/dangilman/trikde
;
samana
5
5
5
https://github.com/dangilman/samana
; and
scipy
[
53
]
.
Data availability
The data used in this article come from HST-GO-15320, HST-GO-15652, HST-GO-17917, HST-GO-13732 and JWST GO-2046. The raw data are publicly available online. Astrometry and flux ratio measurements are presented by
Nierenberg
et al.
[
42
,
41
,
39
], Keeley
et al.
[
29
]
. Reduced imaging data for the systems analyzed in this work are available in the open-source software
samana
, which also provides notebooks that perform the lens modeling and scripts to reproduce the dark matter analysis.
References
[1]
N. Ahvazi, A. Benson, L. V. Sales, E. O. Nadler, S. Weerasooriya, X. Du, and M. S. Bovill
(2024-04)
A comprehensive model for the formation and evolution of the faintest Milky Way dwarf satellites
.
\mnras
529
(
4
),
pp. 3387–3407
.
External Links:
Document
,
2308.13599
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[2]
Astropy Collaboration, A. M. Price-Whelan, B. M. Sipőcz, H. M. Günther, P. L. Lim, S. M. Crawford, S. Conseil, D. L. Shupe, M. W. Craig, N. Dencheva, A. Ginsburg, J. T. Vand erPlas, L. D. Bradley, D. Pérez-Suárez, M. de Val-Borro, T. L. Aldcroft, K. L. Cruz, T. P. Robitaille, E. J. Tollerud, C. Ardelean, T. Babej, Y. P. Bach, M. Bachetti, A. V. Bakanov, S. P. Bamford, G. Barentsen, P. Barmby, A. Baumbach, K. L. Berry, F. Biscani, M. Boquien, K. A. Bostroem, L. G. Bouma, G. B. Brammer, E. M. Bray, H. Breytenbach, H. Buddelmeijer, D. J. Burke, G. Calderone, J. L. Cano Rodríguez, M. Cara, J. V. M. Cardoso, S. Cheedella, Y. Copin, L. Corrales, D. Crichton, D. D’Avella, C. Deil, É. Depagne, J. P. Dietrich, A. Donath, M. Droettboom, N. Earl, T. Erben, S. Fabbro, L. A. Ferreira, T. Finethy, R. T. Fox, L. H. Garrison, S. L. J. Gibbons, D. A. Goldstein, R. Gommers, J. P. Greco, P. Greenfield, A. M. Groener, F. Grollier, A. Hagen, P. Hirst, D. Homeier, A. J. Horton, G. Hosseinzadeh, L. Hu, J. S. Hunkeler, Ž. Ivezić, A. Jain, T. Jenness, G. Kanarek, S. Kendrew, N. S. Kern, W. E. Kerzendorf, A. Khvalko, J. King, D. Kirkby, A. M. Kulkarni, A. Kumar, A. Lee, D. Lenz, S. P. Littlefair, Z. Ma, D. M. Macleod, M. Mastropietro, C. McCully, S. Montagnac, B. M. Morris, M. Mueller, S. J. Mumford, D. Muna, N. A. Murphy, S. Nelson, G. H. Nguyen, J. P. Ninan, M. Nöthe, S. Ogaz, S. Oh, J. K. Parejko, N. Parley, S. Pascual, R. Patil, A. A. Patil, A. L. Plunkett, J. X. Prochaska, T. Rastogi, V. Reddy Janga, J. Sabater, P. Sakurikar, M. Seifert, L. E. Sherbert, H. Sherwood-Taylor, A. Y. Shih, J. Sick, M. T. Silbiger, S. Singanamalla, L. P. Singer, P. H. Sladen, K. A. Sooley, S. Sornarajah, O. Streicher, P. Teuben, S. W. Thomas, G. R. Tremblay, J. E. H. Turner, V. Terrón, M. H. van Kerkwijk, A. de la Vega, L. L. Watkins, B. A. Weaver, J. B. Whitmore, J. Woillez, V. Zabalza, and Astropy Contributors
(2018)
The astropy project: Building an open-science project and status of the v2.0 core package
.
AJ
156
(
123
),
pp. 123
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Software
.
[3]
Astropy Collaboration, A. M. Price-Whelan, P. L. Lim, N. Earl, N. Starkman, L. Bradley, D. L. Shupe, A. A. Patil, L. Corrales, C. E. Brasseur, M. N"othe, A. Donath, E. Tollerud, B. M. Morris, A. Ginsburg, E. Vaher, B. A. Weaver, J. Tocknell, W. Jamieson, M. H. van Kerkwijk, T. P. Robitaille, B. Merry, M. Bachetti, H. M. G"unther, T. L. Aldcroft, J. A. Alvarado-Montes, A. M. Archibald, A. B’odi, S. Bapat, G. Barentsen, J. Baz’an, M. Biswas, M. Boquien, D. J. Burke, D. Cara, M. Cara, K. E. Conroy, S. Conseil, M. W. Craig, R. M. Cross, K. L. Cruz, F. D’Eugenio, N. Dencheva, H. A. R. Devillepoix, J. P. Dietrich, A. D. Eigenbrot, T. Erben, L. Ferreira, D. Foreman-Mackey, R. Fox, N. Freij, S. Garg, R. Geda, L. Glattly, Y. Gondhalekar, K. D. Gordon, D. Grant, P. Greenfield, A. M. Groener, S. Guest, S. Gurovich, R. Handberg, A. Hart, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, D. Homeier, G. Hosseinzadeh, T. Jenness, C. K. Jones, P. Joseph, J. B. Kalmbach, E. Karamehmetoglu, M. Kaluszy’nski, M. S. P. Kelley, N. Kern, W. E. Kerzendorf, E. W. Koch, S. Kulumani, A. Lee, C. Ly, Z. Ma, C. MacBride, J. M. Maljaars, D. Muna, N. A. Murphy, H. Norman, R. O’Steen, K. A. Oman, C. Pacifici, S. Pascual, J. Pascual-Granado, R. R. Patil, G. I. Perren, T. E. Pickering, T. Rastogi, B. R. Roulston, D. F. Ryan, E. S. Rykoff, J. Sabater, P. Sakurikar, J. Salgado, A. Sanghi, N. Saunders, V. Savchenko, L. Schwardt, M. Seifert-Eckert, A. Y. Shih, A. S. Jain, G. Shukla, J. Sick, C. Simpson, S. Singanamalla, L. P. Singer, J. Singhal, M. Sinha, B. M. SipHocz, L. R. Spitler, D. Stansby, O. Streicher, J. Sumak, J. D. Swinbank, D. S. Taranu, N. Tewary, G. R. Tremblay, M. de Val-Borro, S. J. Van Kooten, Z. Vasovi’c, S. Verma, J. V. de Miranda Cardoso, P. K. G. Williams, T. J. Wilson, B. Winkel, W. M. Wood-Vasey, R. Xue, P. Yoachim, C. Zhang, A. Zonca, and Astropy Project Contributors
(2022)
The astropy project: Sustaining and growing a community-oriented open-source project and the latest major release (v5.0) of the core package
.
ApJ
935
(
167
),
pp. 167
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Software
.
[4]
Astropy Collaboration, T. P. Robitaille, E. J. Tollerud, P. Greenfield, M. Droettboom, E. Bray, T. Aldcroft, M. Davis, A. Ginsburg, A. M. Price-Whelan, W. E. Kerzendorf, A. Conley, N. Crighton, K. Barbary, D. Muna, H. Ferguson, F. Grollier, M. M. Parikh, P. H. Nair, H. M. Unther, C. Deil, J. Woillez, S. Conseil, R. Kramer, J. E. H. Turner, L. Singer, R. Fox, B. A. Weaver, V. Zabalza, Z. I. Edwards, K. Azalee Bostroem, D. J. Burke, A. R. Casey, S. M. Crawford, N. Dencheva, J. Ely, T. Jenness, K. Labrie, P. L. Lim, F. Pierfederici, A. Pontzen, A. Ptak, B. Refsdal, M. Servillat, and O. Streicher
(2013)
Astropy: A community Python package for astronomy
.
A&A
558
(
A33
),
pp. A33
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Software
.
[5]
M. W. Auger, T. Treu, A. S. Bolton, R. Gavazzi, L. V. E. Koopmans, P. J. Marshall, L. A. Moustakas, and S. Burles
(2010-11)
The Sloan Lens ACS Survey. X. Stellar, Dynamical, and Total Mass Correlations of Massive Early-type Galaxies
.
Astrophys. J.
724
(
1
),
pp. 511–525
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[6]
G. Battaglia and C. Nipoti
(2022-05)
Stellar dynamics and dark matter in Local Group dwarf galaxies
.
Nature Astronomy
6
,
pp. 659–672
.
External Links:
Document
,
2205.07821
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[7]
A. J. Benson
(2012-02)
G ALACTICUS: A semi-analytic model of galaxy formation
.
New Astronomy
17
(
2
),
pp. 175–197
.
External Links:
Document
,
1008.1786
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[8]
A. J. Benson
(2020-03)
The normalization and slope of the dark matter (sub-)halo mass function on sub-galactic scales
.
\mnras
493
(
1
),
pp. 1268–1276
.
External Links:
Document
,
1911.04579
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[9]
S. Birrer and A. Amara
(2018)
Lenstronomy: Multi-purpose gravitational lens modelling software package
.
Physics of the Dark Universe
22
,
pp. 189–201
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Software
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[10]
S. Birrer, A. Shajib, D. Gilman, A. Galan, J. Aalbers, M. Millon, R. Morgan, G. Pagano, J. Park, L. Teodori, N. Tessore, M. Ueland, L. Van de Vyvere, S. Wagner-Carena, E. Wempe, L. Yang, X. Ding, T. Schmidt, D. Sluse, M. Zhang, and A. Amara
(2021)
Lenstronomy II: A gravitational lensing software ecosystem
.
The Journal of Open Source Software
6
(
62
),
pp. 3283
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Software
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[11]
N. Dalal and C. S. Kochanek
(2002)
Direct Detection of Cold Dark Matter Substructure
.
ApJ
572
,
pp. 25–33
.
External Links:
ISSN 0004-637X
,
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[12]
G. Despali, F. M. Heinze, C. D. Fassnacht, S. Vegetti, C. Spingola, R. Klessen, and M. Tajalli
(2025-07)
Detecting low-mass haloes with strong gravitational lensing: II. Constraints on the density profiles of two detected subhaloes
.
\aap
699
,
pp. A222
.
External Links:
Document
,
2407.12910
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[13]
J. Diemand, B. Moore, and J. Stadel
(2005-01)
Earth-mass dark-matter haloes as the first structures in the early Universe
.
Nature
433
,
pp. 389–391
.
External Links:
ISSN 0028-0836
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[14]
B. Diemer
(2018)
COLOSSUS: a python toolkit for cosmology, large-scale structure, and dark matter halos
.
ApJs
239
(
35
),
pp. 35
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Software
.
[15]
A. Doliva-Dolinsky, M. L. M. Collins, and N. F. Martin
(2025-02)
The satellite galaxies of the Milky Way and Andromeda
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2502.06948
.
External Links:
Document
,
2502.06948
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[16]
X. Du, A. Benson, Z. Carton Zeng, T. Treu, A. H. G. Peter, C. Mace, F. Jiang, S. Yang, C. Gannon, D. Gilman, Anna. M. Nierenberg, and E. O. Nadler
(2024)
Tidal evolution of cored and cuspy dark matter halos
.
arXiv e-prints
(
arXiv:2403.09597
),
pp. arXiv:2403.09597
.
External Links:
2403.09597
,
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[17]
X. Du, D. Gilman, T. Treu, A. Benson, and C. Gannon
(2025)
Empirical model for the tidal evolution of dark matter substructure around strong gravitational lenses
.
Phys. Rev. D
112
(
023009
),
pp. 023009
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[18]
D. Fiacconi, P. Madau, D. Potter, and J. Stadel
(2016)
Cold Dark Matter Substructures in Early-type Galaxy Halos
.
ApJ
824
(
2
),
pp. 144
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[19]
C. Gannon, A. Nierenberg, A. Benson, R. Keeley, X. Du, and D. Gilman
(2025)
Dark matter substructure: a lensing perspective
.
arXiv e-prints
(
arXiv:2501.17362
),
pp. arXiv:2501.17362
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[20]
D. Gilman, S. Birrer, A. Nierenberg, and M. S. H. Oh
(2024)
Turbocharging constraints on dark matter substructure through a synthesis of strong lensing flux ratios and extended lensed arcs
.
arXiv e-prints
(
arXiv:2403.03253
),
pp. arXiv:2403.03253
.
External Links:
2403.03253
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[21]
D. Gilman, S. Birrer, A. Nierenberg, T. Treu, X. Du, and A. Benson
(2020)
Warm dark matter chills out: constraints on the halo mass function and the free-streaming length of dark matter with eight quadruple-image strong gravitational lenses
.
MNRAS
491
,
pp. 6077–6101
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
Cited by:
Software
.
[22]
D. Gilman, A. M. Nierenberg, T. Treu, C. Gannon, X. Du, H. Paugnat, S. Birrer, A. J. Benson, P. Mozumdar, K. C. Wong, D. Williams, R. E. Keeley, K. N. Abazajian, T. Anguita, V. N. Bennert, S. G. Djorgovski, A. Kusenko, M. Malkan, T. Morishita, V. Motta, L. A. Moustakas, W. Sheu, D. Sluse, and M. Stiavelli
(2025)
JWST lensed quasar dark matter survey iv: stringent warm dark matter constraints from the joint reconstruction of extended lensed arcs and quasar flux ratios
.
External Links:
2511.07513
,
Link
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[23]
D. Gilman, Y. Zhong, and J. Bovy
(2023)
Constraining resonant dark matter self-interactions with strong gravitational lenses
.
Phys. Rev. D
107
(
10
),
pp. 103008
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[24]
C. Giocoli, G. Tormen, and F. C. van den Bosch
(2008-06)
The population of dark matter subhaloes: mass functions and average mass-loss rates
.
\mnras
386
(
4
),
pp. 2135–2144
.
External Links:
Document
,
0712.1563
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[25]
C. N. Hao, S. Mao, Z. G. Deng, X. Y. Xia, and H. Wu
(2006)
Isophotal Shapes of Elliptical/S0 Galaxies from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey
.
MNRAS
370
(
3
),
pp. 1339–1350
.
External Links:
ISSN 00358711
,
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[26]
C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman, S. J. van der Walt, R. Gommers, P. Virtanen, D. Cournapeau, E. Wieser, J. Taylor, S. Berg, N. J. Smith, R. Kern, M. Picus, S. Hoyer, M. H. van Kerkwijk, M. Brett, A. Haldane, J. F. del Río, M. Wiebe, P. Peterson, P. Gérard-Marchant, K. Sheppard, T. Reddy, W. Weckesser, H. Abbasi, C. Gohlke, and T. E. Oliphant
(2020)
Array programming with NumPy
.
Nature
585
(
7825
),
pp. 357–362
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Software
.
[27]
G. Kauffmann, S. D. M. White, and B. Guiderdoni
(1993-09)
The formation and evolution of galaxies within merging dark matter haloes.
.
\mnras
264
,
pp. 201–218
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[28]
R. E. Keeley, A. M. Nierenberg, D. Gilman, T. Treu, X. Du, C. Gannon, P. Mozumdar, K. C. Wong, H. Paugnat, S. Birrer, M. Malkan, A. J. Benson, K. N. Abazajian, T. Anguita, V. N. Bennert, S. G. Djorgovski, S. F. Hoenig, A. Kusenko, H. R. Larsson, T. Morishita, V. Motta, L. A. Moustakas, W. Sheu, D. Sluse, D. Stern, M. Stiavelli, and D. Williams
(2025-11)
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey III: Dark Matter Sensitive Flux Ratios and Warm Dark Matter Constraint from the Full Sample
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2511.07765
.
External Links:
Document
,
2511.07765
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[29]
R. E. Keeley, A. M. Nierenberg, D. Gilman, C. Gannon, S. Birrer, T. Treu, A. J. Benson, X. Du, K. N. Abazajian, T. Anguita, V. N. Bennert, S. G. Djorgovski, K. K. Gupta, S. F. Hoenig, A. Kusenko, C. Lemon, M. Malkan, V. Motta, L. A. Moustakas, M. S. H. Oh, D. Sluse, D. Stern, and R. H. Wechsler
(2024)
JWST lensed quasar dark matter survey - II. Strongest gravitational lensing limit on the dark matter free streaming length to date
.
MNRAS
535
(
2
),
pp. 1652–1671
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Data availability
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[30]
S. Y. Kim, A. H. G. Peter, and J. R. Hargis
(2018-11)
Missing Satellites Problem: Completeness Corrections to the Number of Satellite Galaxies in the Milky Way are Consistent with Cold Dark Matter Predictions
.
Phys. Rev. Lett.
121
(
21
),
pp. 211302
.
External Links:
Document
,
1711.06267
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[31]
A. Klypin, A. V. Kravtsov, O. Valenzuela, and F. Prada
(1999-09)
Where Are the Missing Galactic Satellites?
.
Astrophys. J.
522
(
1
),
pp. 82–92
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[32]
D. J. Lagattuta, C. D. Fassnacht, M. W. Auger, P. J. Marshall, M. Bradač, T. Treu, R. Gavazzi, T. Schrabback, C. Faure, and T. Anguita
(2010)
Cosmic evolution of virial and stellar mass in massive early-type galaxies*
.
ApJ
716
(
2
),
pp. 1579
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[33]
A. Lazar, J. S. Bullock, M. Boylan-Kolchin, R. Feldmann, O. Çatmabacak, and L. Moustakas
(2021)
Out of sight, out of mind? The impact of correlated clustering in substructure lensing
.
MNRAS
502
(
4
),
pp. 6064–6079
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[34]
S. Mao and P. Schneider
(1998)
Evidence for substructure in lens galaxies?
.
MNRAS
295
,
pp. 587–594
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[35]
Q. Minor, S. Gad-Nasr, M. Kaplinghat, and S. Vegetti
(2021)
An unexpected high concentration for the dark substructure in the gravitational lens SDSSJ0946+1006
.
MNRAS
507
(
2
),
pp. 1662–1683
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[36]
B. Moore, S. Ghigna, F. Governato, G. Lake, T. Quinn, J. Stadel, and P. Tozzi
(1999-09)
Dark matter substructure within galactic halos
.
The Astrophysical Journal
524
(
1
),
pp. L19
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[37]
E. O. Nadler, R. H. Wechsler, K. Bechtol, Y. -Y. Mao, G. Green, A. Drlica-Wagner, M. McNanna, S. Mau, A. B. Pace, J. D. Simon, A. Kravtsov, S. Dodelson, T. S. Li, A. H. Riley, M. Y. Wang, T. M. C. Abbott, M. Aguena, S. Allam, J. Annis, S. Avila, G. M. Bernstein, E. Bertin, D. Brooks, D. L. Burke, A. C. Rosell, M. C. Kind, J. Carretero, M. Costanzi, L. N. da Costa, J. De Vicente, S. Desai, A. E. Evrard, B. Flaugher, P. Fosalba, J. Frieman, J. García-Bellido, E. Gaztanaga, D. W. Gerdes, D. Gruen, J. Gschwend, G. Gutierrez, W. G. Hartley, S. R. Hinton, K. Honscheid, E. Krause, K. Kuehn, N. Kuropatkin, O. Lahav, M. A. G. Maia, J. L. Marshall, F. Menanteau, R. Miquel, A. Palmese, F. Paz-Chinchón, A. A. Plazas, A. K. Romer, E. Sanchez, B. Santiago, V. Scarpine, S. Serrano, M. Smith, M. Soares-Santos, E. Suchyta, G. Tarle, D. Thomas, T. N. Varga, A. R. Walker, and DES Collaboration
(2020)
Milky Way Satellite Census. II. Galaxy-Halo Connection Constraints Including the Impact of the Large Magellanic Cloud
.
ApJ
893
,
pp. 48
.
External Links:
ISSN 0004-637X
,
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[38]
E. O. Nadler, S. Birrer, D. Gilman, R. H. Wechsler, X. Du, A. Benson, A. M. Nierenberg, and T. Treu
(2021)
Dark Matter Constraints from a Unified Analysis of Strong Gravitational Lenses and Milky Way Satellite Galaxies
.
ApJ
917
,
pp. 7
.
External Links:
ISSN 0004-637X
,
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[39]
A. M. Nierenberg, D. Gilman, T. Treu, G. Brammer, S. Birrer, L. Moustakas, A. Agnello, T. Anguita, C. D. Fassnacht, V. Motta, A. H. G. Peter, and D. Sluse
(2020)
Double dark matter vision: twice the number of compact-source lenses with narrow-line lensing and the WFC3 grism
.
MNRAS
492
,
pp. 5314–5335
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
Cited by:
Data availability
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[40]
A. M. Nierenberg, R. E. Keeley, D. Sluse, D. Gilman, S. Birrer, T. Treu, K. N. Abazajian, T. Anguita, A. J. Benson, V. N. Bennert, S. G. Djorgovski, X. Du, C. D. Fassnacht, S. F. Hoenig, A. Kusenko, C. Lemon, M. Malkan, V. Motta, L. A. Moustakas, D. Stern, and R. H. Wechsler
(2023)
JWST lensed quasar dark matter survey I: Description and First Results
.
arXiv e-prints
(
arXiv:2309.10101
),
pp. arXiv:2309.10101
.
External Links:
2309.10101
,
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[41]
A. M. Nierenberg, T. Treu, G. Brammer, A. H. G. Peter, C. D. Fassnacht, C. R. Keeton, C. S. Kochanek, K. B. Schmidt, D. Sluse, and S. A. Wright
(2017)
Probing dark matter substructure in the gravitational lens HE 0435-1223 with the WFC3 grism
.
MNRAS
471
,
pp. 2224–2236
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
Cited by:
Data availability
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[42]
A. M. Nierenberg, T. Treu, S. A. Wright, C. D. Fassnacht, and M. W. Auger
(2014)
Detection of substructure with adaptive optics integral field spectroscopy of the gravitational lens B1422+231
.
MNRAS
442
,
pp. 2434–2445
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
Cited by:
Data availability
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
,
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[43]
M. Oguri and P. J. Marshall
(2010-07)
\mnras
405
(
4
),
pp. 2579–2593
.
External Links:
1001.2037
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[44]
M. S. H. Oh, A. Nierenberg, D. Gilman, and S. Birrer
(2024)
Improving flux ratio anomaly precision by measuring gravitational lens multipole moments with extended arcs
.
arXiv e-prints
(
arXiv:2404.17124
),
pp. arXiv:2404.17124
.
External Links:
2404.17124
,
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[45]
R. Pordes, OSG Consortium, D. Petravick, B. Kramer, D. Olson, M. Livny, A. Roy, P. Avery, K. Blackburn, T. Wenaus, F. Würthwein, I. Foster, R. Gardner, M. Wilde, A. Blatecky, J. McGee, and R. Quick
(2007-07)
The open science grid
.
In
Journal of Physics Conference Series
,
Journal of Physics Conference Series
, Vol.
78
,
pp. 012057
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Acknowledgments
.
[46]
T. M. Ragonneau and Z. Zhang
(2024)
COBYQA Version 1.1.2
.
External Links:
Link
Cited by:
Software
.
[47]
T. M. Ragonneau
(2022)
Model-based derivative-free optimization methods and software
.
Ph.D. Thesis
,
Department of Applied Mathematics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
,
Hong Kong, China
.
External Links:
Link
Cited by:
Software
.
[48]
I. Sfiligoi, D. C. Bradley, B. Holzman, P. Mhashilkar, S. Padhi, and F. Wurthwein
(2009-03)
The Pilot Way to Grid Resources Using glideinWMS
.
In
2009 WRI World Congress on Computer Science and Information Engineering
,
Vol.
2
,
pp. 92
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Acknowledgments
.
[49]
R. K. Sheth, H. J. Mo, and G. Tormen
(2001)
Ellipsoidal collapse and an improved model for the number and spatial distribution of dark matter haloes
.
MNRAS
323
(
1
),
pp. 1–12
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[50]
V. Springel, J. Wang, M. Vogelsberger, A. Ludlow, A. Jenkins, A. Helmi, J. F. Navarro, C. S. Frenk, and S. D. M. White
(2008-12)
The Aquarius Project: the subhaloes of galactic haloes
.
\mnras
391
(
4
),
pp. 1685–1711
.
External Links:
Document
,
0809.0898
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[51]
E. J. Tollerud, J. S. Bullock, L. E. Strigari, and B. Willman
(2008)
Hundreds of milky way satellites? Luminosity bias in the satellite luminosity function
.
ApJ
688
(
1
),
pp. 277–289
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[52]
S. Vegetti, S. Birrer, G. Despali, C. D. Fassnacht, D. Gilman, Y. Hezaveh, L. Perreault Levasseur, J. P. McKean, D. M. Powell, C. M. O’Riordan, and G. Vernardos
(2023)
Strong gravitational lensing as a probe of dark matter
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2306.11781
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
[53]
P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant, M. Haberland, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau, E. Burovski, P. Peterson, W. Weckesser, J. Bright, S. J. van der Walt, M. Brett, J. Wilson, K. J. Millman, N. Mayorov, A. R. J. Nelson, E. Jones, R. Kern, E. Larson, C. J. Carey, İ. Polat, Y. Feng, E. W. Moore, J. VanderPlas, D. Laxalde, J. Perktold, R. Cimrman, I. Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, C. R. Harris, A. M. Archibald, A. H. Ribeiro, F. Pedregosa, P. van Mulbregt, and SciPy 1.0 Contributors
(2020)
SciPy 1.0: Fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in python
.
Nature Methods
17
,
pp. 261–272
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Software
.
[54]
S. Yang, X. Du, A. J. Benson, A. R. Pullen, and A. H. G. Peter
(2020-11)
A new calibration method of sub-halo orbital evolution for semi-analytic models
.
\mnras
498
(
3
),
pp. 3902–3913
.
External Links:
Document
,
2003.10646
Cited by:
JWST Lensed Quasar Dark Matter Survey V: Measuring the minimum halo mass with strong gravitational lensing.
.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA