Understanding Left-Moving Supercells: Environmental Factors and Forecasting Challenges
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
2
Data and Methods
3
Results
3.1
Overview
3.2
Thermodynamic Characteristics
3.3
Skew-Ts
3.4
Kinematics
3.5
Hodographs
3.6
Composite Parameters
4
Conclusions
Acknowledgements
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2604.10668v1 [physics.ao-ph] 12 Apr 2026
Understanding Left-Moving Supercells: Environmental Factors and Forecasting Challenges
Abstract
Left-moving (LM) supercells, characterized by anticyclonically rotating updrafts in the Northern Hemisphere, are significant due to their propensity to produce large hail. Although less common than right-moving supercells, they present notable forecasting challenges and societal impacts. However, despite these impacts, the environments of LM supercells are poorly understood compared to their right-moving counterparts. To address this gap, this research focuses on enhancing the understanding of LM supercells by examining the environmental conditions conducive to their development. A manually compiled and quality-controlled dataset of over 850 LM supercell cases across North America is used to provide a robust sample. Near-storm environments are characterized through the use of RAP/RUC inflow proximity sounding profiles. Leveraging storm properties, including mesoanticyclone strength, hail size, wind speed, and duration, we investigate whether environments can differentiate between these varying strengths and categories, thereby enhancing forecaster awareness. Results show that LMs typically form in environments supportive of right movers, with a key difference being that LMs likely only realize the shape of the hodograph above their LCLs. Lapse rates, CAPE, and LCL height are the best predictors of LM strength and hail potential. LMs with wind reports have drier boundary layer moisture, steeper 0–3 km lapse rates, larger CAPE, and higher LCL heights, leading to increased evaporational cooling. Longer-lived LMs often have weaker CAPE and stronger shear as compared to shorter-lived LMs. These results establish a unique parameter space climatology of LM supercells, thus providing essential forecasting insight and reducing the research gap for these storms.
\statement
Supercells produce the majority of severe weather perils of any convective storm, posing a significant threat to society. These storms often develop in pairs and move either to the right or left of the mean atmospheric wind (for typical wind profiles), resulting in two distinct storms and associated hazards. The left-moving supercell, while less common than the right-mover, has been studied more rarely even though they are perceived as significant producers of severe hail and wind. This has resulted in a knowledge gap and substantial forecasting challenge. This research establishes the environmental ingredients in which these leftward moving supercells form to aid forecasters in predicting and warning for such events.
1
Introduction
Severe convective storms pose a great threat to society, resulting in more than $60 billion in annual insurance losses
(Aon,
2025
; MunichRe,
2025
)
. In the United States, right-moving (RM) supercells (i.e., cyclonically rotating and moving to the right of the mean vertical wind shear) are commonly documented for their propensity to produce multiple hazards (e.g., hail, wind, and tornadoes), leading to a high contribution to annual losses. In contrast, their left-moving (LM) counterparts are less studied, mainly due to their perceived uncommon occurrence and predominance of producing hail as opposed to tornadoes, which are typically perceived as a greater threat
(Brown and Meitín,
1994
; Dostalek
et al.
,
2004
; Lindsey and Bunkers,
2005
; Bunkers and Stoppkotte,
2007
)
. Prior work has approximated that for every LM supercell, there are 50 RMs
(Burgess,
1981
)
; however, this is not observed in operations, and more recent studies have shown LMs to account for 10–30% of all supercells
(Bunkers,
2002
; Homeyer
et al.
,
2025
)
. Furthermore, while rarer than RM supercells, LMs commonly produce severe hail (
≥
\geq
2.54 cm), with the fraction being as large as 90% for some climatologies
(Bunkers,
2002
)
. Additionally, some studies have shown that about 75% of LMs in their dataset produced significant severe hail
(
≥
\geq
5.08 cm; Edwards
et al.
,
2004
)
, which can result in billion-dollar losses in a single event
(Blair
et al.
,
2011
; Johnson and Sugden,
2014
; Gunturi and Tippett,
2017
)
. Although LM supercells pose a substantial threat to society, there is a notable lack of research to understand these severe storms.
The physical processes driving the deviant motion of LM supercells are well understood and arise from the internal dynamics of a rotating updraft. This causes the storm to either split or develop stronger upward motion on the left flank of the updraft, ultimately leading to the most defining characteristic of LM supercells: an anticyclonically rotating updraft
(e.g., Weisman and Klemp,
1986
; Klemp,
1987
; Davies-Jones,
2002
)
. LMs tend to be weaker, shorter-lived, and rarer than their RM counterparts, at least partly due to the climatological likelihood of veering in the low-level wind field, which in the US typically favors upward vertical motion on the right flank of the updraft
(Fujita and Grandoso,
1968
; Klemp and Wilhelmson,
1978
; Davies-Jones,
1984
,
2015
; Rotunno and Klemp,
1985
; Grasso,
2000
)
. Furthermore, with few documented LMs producing tornadoes
(Brown and Knupp,
1980
; Monteverdi
et al.
,
2001
; Dostalek
et al.
,
2004
; Bunkers and Stoppkotte,
2007
; Homeyer
et al.
,
2025
)
, these events are often seen as less of a hazard by meteorologists. As such, LM supercells have been studied mainly through case studies and radar analyses
(e.g., Hammond,
1967
; Charba and Sasaki,
1971
; Nielsen-Gammon and Read,
1995
; Grasso and Hilgendorf,
2001
; Edwards and Hodanish,
2006
)
. Most of these studies focused on documentation of the environmental characteristics of the case and the evolution of the storm, usually through radar and/or satellite analysis, to identify differences relative to their RM counterparts. Several case studies focused on more impactful LM events that produced large hail
(e.g., Edwards
et al.
,
2004
; Lindsey and Bunkers,
2005
; Zeitler and Bunkers,
2005
; Jones and Nixon,
2017
)
, however, none of these studies explicitly explored a large sample of environments that promote the formation of these storms.
Other studies have examined datasets of LMs, but these have been limited to sample sizes of less than a hundred to a few hundred cases, owing to the bias towards focusing on RMs in observations
(Houze
et al.
,
1993
; Bunkers,
2002
; Edwards
et al.
,
2004
; Nixon and Allen,
2022
; Tonn
et al.
,
2023
)
. These studies found that LM supercells exist in environments supportive of RMs with moderate to strong CAPE, both positive and negative storm-relative helicity (SRH) in the low levels, and a dominant veer-back-veer hodograph shape. Much of the prior literature on LMs focused on the hodograph shape, using it to predict their deviant motion and/or to understand how they acquire their rotation
(e.g., Davies-Jones,
1984
; Bunkers
et al.
,
2000
; Bunkers,
2002
; Bunkers
et al.
,
2024
)
. Aside from these metrics, there has been no in-depth research defining the environments that are supportive of LM supercells, especially as they pertain to LM rotational strength. This has translated into fewer tools for operational forecasting, likely compounded by reduced observations from these storms (e.g., storm chasers rarely focus on LM storms).
To address some of these gaps, we build on earlier work by using a new dataset of 889 quality-controlled LM cases occurring from 2011 to 2022
(Van Den Broeke
et al.
,
2024
)
. This novel dataset is currently the largest observed and quality-controlled dataset of LMs with quantified mesoanticyclone strength and other metadata for each supercell. Recent studies have begun to grow in sample size
(e.g., Nixon and Allen,
2022
; Tonn
et al.
,
2023
; Homeyer
et al.
,
2025
)
, although their datasets have limited quality control and no quantified strength. This research will re-evaluate the current knowledge regarding the environments of LM supercells, exploring their basic thermodynamic and kinematic parameters by focusing on the following questions:
1) What is the typical parameter space in which left-moving supercells develop?
2) What does a typical hodograph and sounding look like for left-moving supercells?
3) How do both of these properties vary based on mesoanticyclone intensity?
2
Data and Methods
This research uses the LM dataset from
Van Den Broeke
et al.
(
2024
)
, described further in
Bunkers
et al.
(
2024
)
and
Van Den Broeke
et al.
(
2025
)
. The reader is referred to
Bunkers
et al.
(
2024
)
for further details on the dataset and its potential biases. In summary, it consists of 889 observed and quality-controlled LM supercells from 2011 to 2022 with quantified mesoanticyclone strengths. Mesoanticyclone strength—marginal, weak, moderate, and strong—is based on the maximum rotational velocity classifications from the
Andra (
1997
)
nomogram. The weakest LMs (i.e., marginal) in this classification closely correspond to the LM members described by
Brown and Meitín (
1994
)
and may also align with the “intermediary type” supercells identified by
Houze
et al.
(
1993
)
. Spatially, the dataset spans the continental United States, with a concentration across the Great Plains, extending from Texas to the Dakotas (Fig. 1). There is a gradual decrease in cases with eastward extent, and a sharp cutoff west of the Continental Divide, consistent with prior radar-derived supercell climatologies
(e.g., Smith
et al.
,
2012
; Homeyer
et al.
,
2025
)
and model proxy climatologies
(Ashley
et al.
,
2023
; Zeeb
et al.
,
2024
)
. As radar coverage is not limited by borders, two cases are located just north of North Dakota in Canada (Fig. 1), in addition to four weak cases in Hawaii (not shown). The Hawaiian cases are not included in the data analysis, therefore dropping our total cases to 885. Following radar identification of cases, storm reports from the Storm Prediction Center (SPC) were matched with each LM in the dataset; however, not all cases had reports. All reports were taken within 20 km of each storm centroid during the analysis period and quality controlled by a team of meteorologists to ensure each report was associated with the corresponding storm [see
Van Den Broeke
et al.
(
2025
)
for further details]. The dataset includes a total of 1383 storm reports across 502 cases. Since the reports come from the SPC dataset, reports in the analysis are divided up into their two main categories: severe and significant severe
(Hales,
1988
)
. Herein, severe hail is
≥
\geq
2.54 cm and
<
<
5.08 cm, significant severe hail is
≥
\geq
5.08 cm, severe wind is
≥
\geq
50 kts and
<
<
65 kts, and significant severe wind is
≥
\geq
65 kts.
Figure 1:
Spatial distributions of the initial latitude and longitude from the 885 LM cases in North America. The colors are assigned by mesoanticyclone intensity and the size of the symbol increases with increasing intensity. Circles correspond to the available 867 RUC/RAP vertical-sounding profiles while the diamonds are the remaining 22 unavailable RAP/RUC profiles.
As in
Bunkers
et al.
(
2024
)
, soundings from the Rapid Update Cycle
(RUC; Benjamin
et al.
,
2004
)
and the Rapid Refresh
(RAP; operational since May 2012, Benjamin
et al.
,
2016
)
models were obtained for each case via the SPC mesoscale analysis system
(Bothwell
et al.
,
2002
)
. The nearest inflow sounding at the bottom of the starting hour was selected and derived from post-processed 25-hPa vertical spacing at the nearest model grid point, with surface values based on the RUC/RAP final analysis
(Coniglio and Jewell,
2022
)
. The number of vertical data levels varied depending on the surface pressure, with a maximum of 37 levels and a profile top at 100 hPa. These profiles are commonly used for calculating convective parameters and have been shown to reasonably approximate less frequently available rawinsonde profiles, with some limitations
(Coniglio,
2012
; Coffer
et al.
,
2020
; Coniglio and Jewell,
2022
)
. A subset of these data was interpolated to 250-m vertical intervals for skew-T and hodograph construction, while the pressure level data were used for thermodynamic and kinematic parameter calculations. All LM kinematics were calculated using the recently proposed 5 m s
-
1
deviation off the 0–6 km mean wind as opposed to prior estimates that were symmetrical with the right mover
(7.5 m s
-
1
; Bunkers
et al.
,
2024
)
. All parameters were calculated using the Python package
xcape
(Lepore
et al.
,
2021
)
.
The dataset includes 867 cases with matching RAP/RUC profiles, as 22 cases have missing profiles due to model run availability. None of the point sounding profiles are convectively contaminated, as assessed by having omega
>
>
-10
μ
\mu
b s
-
1
,
<
<
90% mean RH in the lowest 6 km, and
<
<
0.01 mm of convective precipitation for each grid point. The sample size for the available RAP/RUC soundings for each mesoanticyclone intensity is as follows: 74 strong cases (8.54%), 296 moderate cases (34.14%), 461 weak cases (53.17%), and 36 marginal cases (4.15%). Results are most robust for moderate and weak cases and hence could potentially skew the results for the “all” (i.e., the entire 867 LM dataset) category; however, since no research has established a climatology for the parameter space of LMs, this has little influence on the impact of this study. During our analysis, we identified another subset of LMs that included elevated cases on the north side of a frontal boundary. These cases are included in the parameter breakdown but separated from the rest of the dataset for the skew-T and CAPE with respect to height analysis, as the substantial temperature inversion makes it uncertain which parcel trace should be used to characterize the profile.
3
Results
3.1
Overview
LM supercells are most common from March to September (the interquartile range is from April to August), peaking in May with a median of June
(Fig. 2a; Smith
et al.
,
2012
; Homeyer
et al.
,
2025
)
. Marginal and weak LM cases have a median in May, while moderate and strong median occurrences are in June. LM cases in the dataset are most common between 15:00–19:00 local time (LT; 20:00–01:00 UTC) and peak at 17:00 LT, while marginal, weak, and strong cases peak at 22:00 UTC and moderate LM cases peak at 23:00 UTC (Fig. 2b). Generally, LM occurence is two hours earlier compared to RMs
(Smith
et al.
,
2012
)
with a median occurrence at 17:00 LT (21:00 UTC), except for strong cases, with a median occurrence at 18:00 LT. Strong cases have the smallest distribution in monthly and LT occurrence, occurring during the seasonal and daily peak in CAPE (Figs. 2a,b).
Figure 2:
Summary of the month (a) and local time start hour (b) for each case broken down by mesoanticyclone strength. c) and d) are summaries of the maximum magnitude severe weather reports by case for severity (a) and hail size only (b). In c), bars are outlined based on storm report type; green outlines are hail and blue outlines are wind reports.
While biases in reporting frequency reduce sample size, 502 (56.5 %) cases have reported hazards. The perception that LM supercells are associated with large hail is supported by this sample, as 1236 (89.4%) of the storm reports in this dataset are hail reports. Furthermore, 476 (94.8%) of the cases with reports produced hail
≥
\geq
2.54 cm, 120 (23.9%) of which produced significant severe hail (Figs. 2c,d). LMs may also produce severe winds, and while not as common as hail reports, there are 145 wind reports (10.5% of all reports) over 83 (16.5%) cases. From those cases, 71 cases produced severe wind and 12 cases produced significant severe wind (Fig. 2c). There is only one tornado report from a strong LM. Weak and moderate LMs have the most total severe reports, resulting from their larger sample size in the dataset.
3.2
Thermodynamic Characteristics
Increasing LM mesoanticyclone strength shows a positive association with steeper lapse rates (Figs. 3a,d) and results in a significant (
p
<
<
0.05) relationship between increasing CAPE and mesoanticyclonic intensity, no matter the initial parcel [e.g., surface-based (SB), mixed-layer (ML), most-unstable (MU); Figs. 3b,c]. There are insignificant differences in the CIN distributions across mesoanticyclone strengths, with generally consistent ML CIN distributions and a subtle decreasing interquartile range for MU CIN with increasing mesoanticyclone strength (Figs. 3e,f). Although not significant for all categories, LCL and freezing level heights increase with increasing mesoanticyclone strength (Figs. 3h,g). The median LM LCL height is
∼
\sim
900 m and the median freezing level height is
∼
\sim
3.6 km, both of which are lower than typical RM heights
(e.g., Edwards and Thompson,
1998
; Rasmussen and Blanchard,
1998
; Craven and Brooks,
2004
; Thompson
et al.
,
2003
; Nixon
et al.
,
2023
)
.
Figure 3:
Violin plots of several thermodynamic variables broken down by mesoanticyclone strength for the 867 RUC/RAP sounding profiles in the LM dataset (i.e., the all category). The white line in each box is the median, the box bounds represent the 25
th
and 75
th
percentiles, and the whiskers outline the maximum and minimum, excluding outliers. The moderate (strong) mesoanticyclones are statistically different (i.e.,
p
<
<
0.05) compared to the category if a red square (triangle) is drawn using the Brunner-Munzel test. The sample size for each mesoanticyclone intensity is as follows: 36 marginal cases, 461 weak cases, 296 moderate cases, 74 strong cases and 867 total (i.e., all) cases.
Since LMs typically move poleward in the Northern Hemisphere, they may be elevated, existing on the cool side of a boundary or transition to an elevated state as they cross over to the cool side of a boundary
(Bunkers,
2002
)
. Additionally, since elevated convection is known for producing hail
(Grant,
1995
; Banacos and Schultz,
2005
; Horgan
et al.
,
2007
; Reif and Bluestein,
2017
; Nixon
et al.
,
2023
)
, and LMs tend to predominantly generate hail, we investigated how many LMs in the dataset may be elevated and whether the hail producing LMs in the dataset may be elevated. We did not, however, look into cases that may have become elevated after the start of the analysis period when the proximity sounding was obtained, as storm modification likely makes such samples non-representative. The most unstable level below 700 hPa (MU level) indicates whether the most unstable parcel is elevated. Since a storm’s inflow cannot always be determined from a modeled sounding, we emphasize that while an MU level of 1 often represents a surface-based profile and an MU level greater than one often represents an elevated profile, this may not correctly categorize the storm’s inflow as dynamic processes can result in the lifting of stable air. Nevertheless, the median MU level for all LMs is 1 with the interquartile range decreasing with mesoanticyclone strength, indicating that stronger LMs are more likely surface-based in the nearest sounding profile (Fig. 3i); 50% of marginal cases have an MU level
>
>
1. More specifically, the MU level is
>
>
1 for 41.1% of all LMs, signifying that these cases may be elevated in the nearest profile (Fig. 3i). Out of these cases, 54.3% (40.8% of all hail cases) produced hail; 41.2% of which was severe hail (41.3% of all severe hail cases), and 13.2% significant hail (39.2% of all significant severe hail cases).
Longer-lived LMs tend to have higher MU levels, decreasing with mesoanticyclone strength (not shown). Of the 59 cases lasting
≥
\geq
2 hours, 32 (54.2%) have an MU level
>
>
1, 24 (40.7%) of which produced severe hail, and 23 (39.0%) of which produced significant severe hail. Of the 32 cases that have an MU level
>
>
1, there is an equal number of cases that produced severe and significant severe hail. These results may be biased by the small sample size and the increased reporting coverage that long-lived events create as they travel longer distances. Moreover, the longest-lived LM events are associated with lower CAPE, with median values
<
<
1000 J kg
-
1
, whereas shorter-lived LMs have medians
∼
\sim
2000 J kg
-
1
, contrasting with previous work showing CAPE increasing as a function of duration
(e.g., Brimelow,
1999
; Brimelow
et al.
,
2002
; Jewell and Brimelow,
2009
)
.
For LM cases with hail reports, there is a positive association of steeper lapse rates with mesoanticyclone strength and increasing hail size (Figs. 4a,d). This contributes to the positive association of CAPE with increasing hail size and LM strength, where CAPE tends to be slightly higher for significant severe hail compared to severe hail (Figs. 4b,c). Additionally, LMs that produce hail tend to have higher LCLs than those that do not (not shown), with significant severe hail having the highest median LCL heights (Fig. 4h), which is often an important characteristic of hail-producing storms
(Edwards and Thompson,
1998
; Groenemeijer and Van Delden,
2007
; Johnson and Sugden,
2014
; Púčik
et al.
,
2015
)
. Several previous studies have shown little skill in the freezing level height for predicting hail size or hail potential
(e.g., Edwards and Thompson,
1998
; Johnson and Sugden,
2014
; Giordani
et al.
,
2024
)
, although, recently, lower freezing level heights have been shown in hail producing RMs
(e.g., Nixon and Allen,
2022
)
. For LMs, there are slightly higher freezing levels for significant severe hail cases compared to severe hail
(Gensini
et al.
,
2021
, Fig. 4g)
; however, while statistically significant, the difference is not large and may be difficult to differentiate operationally.
Figure 4:
As for Fig. 3, however, only for cases with hail reports. Cases are divided into two groups: severe hail and significant severe hail. A red circle denotes a statistically significant difference (i.e.,
p
<
<
0.05) between severe hail and significant severe hail using the Brunner-Munzel test. The sample size for each mesoanticyclone intensity and hail size is as follows: 12 severe hail and 2 significant severe hail marginal cases, 190 severe and 34 significant severe weak cases, 112 severe and 58 significant severe moderate cases, 31 severe and 26 significant severe strong cases, and 345 severe and 120 significant severe total (i.e., all) cases.
LM cases with wind reports tend to have steeper 0–3 km lapse rates, with significant severe wind having some of the steepest 0–3 and 2–4 km lapse rates in the dataset, leading to larger CAPE compared to cases without wind reports (not shown). When compared to severe wind cases, significant severe wind cases tend to have lower CAPE, however, these results are non-conclusive as the sample size for significant wind is only 12 cases. The freezing level heights are, however, significantly (
p
<
<
0.05) lower for significant severe wind reports compared to severe wind cases. Additionally, LCL height is slightly higher for cases with wind reports, with significant severe wind cases having higher LCLs than severe wind cases (not shown). The higher CAPE and LCLs likely lead to deeper cold pools from enhanced water loading and evaporational cooling below the cloud layer
(Srivastava,
1985
; Wakimoto,
1985
; Markowski and Richardson,
2010
)
, and enhancing the downward transport of momentum.
3.3
Skew-Ts
Excluding the subset of elevated cases as dissused in the methods section, the mean LM skew-T has 1974 J kg
-
1
of MUCAPE with moderately dry conditions from the surface to
∼
\sim
900 hPa and deeper moisture roughly from 900 to 750 hPa (Fig. 6a). Low-level CAPE is not overly large (73.5 J kg
-
1
0–3 km CAPE), with a higher concentration of CAPE from 700 hPa to the equilibrium level (EL; Figs. 5a and 6a,b). Similarly to the CAPE distribution plots (Figs. 3b,c), marginal LM cases have the weakest SB and MUCAPE, which increases with increasing mesoanticyclone strength (Figs. 6a,b). However, marginal MUCAPE and weak MUCAPE, and SBCAPE have the largest low-level CAPE up to
∼
\sim
3.25 km above which, strong LM MUCAPE has the largest CAPE. Additionally, marginal LMs have the largest SBCIN, while MUCIN is generally consistent among mesoanticyclone intensities (Figs. 6e,f). These differences in the CAPE and CIN distributions are driven primarily by warmer overall profiles for increasing mesoanticyclone strength, and increases to dewpoint in both the low and mid-levels (Fig. 5b). As such, strong LMs tend to have deeper moisture throughout most of the profile (deepest through the lowest 500 hPa), whereas the marginal cases tend to be drier (driest through the lowest 500 hPa). This results in large differences in the LFC and EL heights and subsequent total profile CAPE. For example, strong cases, which tend to have the largest CAPE, have the lowest LFC and highest EL heights, whereas marginal LMs, which tend to have the lowest CAPE, have the highest LFC and lowest EL heights (Figs. 5b and 6a,b).
Figure 5:
Composite skew-Ts for a) the mean of the 851 LM cases, b) each mesoanticyclone strength, c) cases with hail reports divided by severe, significant severe and cases without hail reports, d) cases with wind reports divided by severe, significant severe and cases without wind reports, and e) cases divided by duration lasting 0–1 hour, 1–2 hours, and
≥
\geq
2 hours. Shaded is the area between the 10
th
and 90
th
percentiles for the temperature (red) and dewpoint (blue). For each subfigure, the median MUCAPE and bulk wind difference for 0–1 km (BWD01) and 0–6 km (BWD06) layers are included, except for b), which only has MUCAPE for each intensity.
Figure 6:
Mean SB and MUCAPE and CIN with respect to height separated by mesoanticyclone strength, hail size, and wind speed. The first column contains the full vertical profiles with rectangles that outline the corresponding zoomed in areas in the second column.
A possible explanation for why marginal LMs may be weaker is from the dilution of the updraft decreasing the overall strength
(e.g., Zipser,
2003
; Romps and Kuang,
2010a
,
b
)
. However, marginal LMs tend to have higher shear, leading to a smaller fraction of CAPE loss
(e.g., Peters
et al.
,
2019
,
2020
)
. Another potential explanation is that these cases tend to be consistent with the high-shear-low-CAPE (HSLC) archetype
(Sherburn and Parker,
2014
; Sherburn
et al.
,
2016
; Wade and Parker,
2021
)
, which have shallower overall storm depth and mesocyclones closer to the surface. However, RM HSLC cases often have larger CAPE concentrated within the lowest few kilometers
(Sherburn and Parker,
2014
; Sherburn
et al.
,
2016
; Wade and Parker,
2021
)
, which is not the case for these LM cases (65.2 J kg
-
1
0–3 km CAPE). Most CAPE in marginal LMs tends to be concentrated between
∼
\sim
5–10 km (Figs. 5b and 6a), potentially resulting in taller mesoanticyclones compared to RM HSLC cases, which suggests this is less likely to be a detection bias. Furthermore, cases in this dataset were required to remain within 200 km of a WSR-88D radar and within 150 km for at least 75% of their lifespan, making it less likely that their mesoanticyclones were located below the radar beam height. Radar observations and numerical simulations are required to further investigate the internal dynamics of these marginal LMs and determine whether they are physically consistent with other HSLC cases.
Skew-Ts for LMs that last 0–2 hours are generally similar, whereas those that exceed 2 hours have stronger shear and lower CAPE (Fig. 5e). These profiles have modestly cooler and slightly drier boundary layers, a factor that becomes more pronounced between 700–200 hPa in comparison to the other categories. For longer-lived LMs, the 0–6 km bulk wind difference increases while CAPE generally decreases. The LFCs for cases
≥
\geq
2 hours are higher, and similar to the marginal cases, the drier mid-levels may act to dilute the updraft. However, higher shear may act against dilution due to a smaller fraction of CAPE loss
(e.g., Peters
et al.
,
2019
,
2020
)
. Additionally, these cases tend to have little low-level CAPE, with a larger distribution of this CAPE above the freezing level, potentially leading to a more favorable environment for hail growth
(Nixon
et al.
,
2023
)
.
When comparing skew-Ts with hail reports, the mean skew-T for LMs with significant severe hail has the largest CAPE and aligns with the optimal range for hail growth
(Lin and Kumjian,
2022
)
. These cases also have lower 0–1 km shear, deeper boundary layer moisture, drier mid-levels (
∼
\sim
700–300 hPa), and higher ELs (Fig. 5c). Additionally, significant severe hail cases have the largest low-level CAPE and lowest CIN (both SB and MU), signifying that these cases are more likely to be surface-based (Fig. 6). Furthermore, these cases have higher average CAPE (
>
>
145.3 J kg
-
1
) concentrated below the hail growth region; however, this may be offset by the weaker low-level shear
(Nixon
et al.
,
2023
)
. Cases with severe hail have the weakest CAPE and highest shear with a drier boundary layer and deeper mid-level (
∼
\sim
700–300 hPa) moisture (Fig. 5c). Moreover, these cases have the lowest low-level CAPE with the MUCAPE being the lowest of all categories below 1.5 km (Figs. 6c,d). Severe hail cases also have greater SBCIN and closely align with the strong LM cases, while their low-level MUCIN closely aligns with the SBCIN for significant severe hail cases (Figs. 6e,f,g,h). The cases without hail reports closely align with the severe hail cases, except they exhibit weaker shear and slightly greater mid-level moisture.
The mean skew-T for significant severe wind has the largest dewpoint depression, including the driest surface-to-
∼
\sim
875 hPa (Fig. 5d). These cases would tend to favor greater subcloud depth, with moisture predominantly found above the mixed layer through 550 hPa. There is a dry pocket from
∼
\sim
500 hPa to 400 hPa within the composite and while this can aid in initiating and strengthening wind gusts at the surface, given the small sample size, this is likely a function of outliers as seen in driest percentile (Fig. 5d). Additionally, significant severe wind cases have the lowest 0–3 km CAPE (SB and MU) out of all cases with only
∼
\sim
35 J kg
-
1
in the lowest 2.5 km (Figs. 6a,b,c,d). The surface elevation is highest for significant severe wind cases, likely a function of geographic prevalence—9 of the 12 cases are in the High Plains and one is in Arizona
(Van Den Broeke
et al.
,
2025
)
. Storms in these regions typically have drier surface conditions, leading to higher bases, enhancing evaporational cooling and outflow. As for LMs with severe wind, their skew-Ts have the highest low-level moisture out of the three categories but are still generally dry from the surface to
∼
\sim
900 hPa (Fig. 5d). The cases with severe wind have deeper boundary layer moisture above 900 hPa, closely aligning with the cases without wind reports until about 500 hPa, where they have the highest moisture out of the three categories until about 400 hPa. Generally, the mean parcel profile for the severe wind cases matches the significant severe wind parcel profile, except for lower expected cloud bases and higher low-level CAPE (Fig. 5d). Finally, the LM cases with no wind reports tend to have drier boundary layer conditions than severe wind cases; however, above the boundary layer, their profiles share similarities except for slightly drier and cooler throughout most of no wind reports profile (Fig. 5d).
3.4
Kinematics
Unlike most parameters, 0–1 km shear is highest for marginal LM cases, decreasing with increasing mesoanticyclone strength (Fig. 7a). There is little difference in 0–6 km shear
(Fig. 7d; Bunkers
et al.
,
2024
)
. Instead, the effective bulk wind difference (EBWD), which accounts and corrects for elevated storms, may be a better deep layer shear metric for LMs than 0–6 km shear. As such, EBWD tends to be slightly higher with increasing mesoanticyclone strength, except for marginal cases, which tend to have the highest bulk shear (Fig. 7g). With increasing duration, EBWD has little variation among intensities; however, 0–6 km shear increases following previous literature
(not shown; e.g., Bunkers
et al.
,
2006
; Davenport,
2021
; Bunkers
et al.
,
2024
)
.
Figure 7:
As for Fig. 3, except for kinematic variables.
SRH quantifies streamwise vorticity and storm-relative inflow that support low- and mid-level mesocyclones, making it a valuable predictor of updraft rotation, strength, and tornadic potential
(e.g., Davies-Jones
et al.
,
1990
; Davies and Johns,
1993
; Esterheld and Giuliano,
2008
; Goldacker and Parker,
2023
)
. For LMs, SRH (both LM and RM) 0–0.5, 0–1, 0–3, and 1–3 km show little variation as a function of mesoanticyclone intensity, but there is sensitivity between the different SRH layers [e.g., 0–1 compared to 0–3 km; Figs. 7b,c,e,f,h,i; not shown]. Marginal LMs tend to have more positive SRH, which may result in weaker updrafts due to the “negative” curvature for anticyclonic rotation. However, as previously discussed, marginal LMs tend to be elevated and therefore less likely to be affected by the lowest kilometer of positive SRH
(Thompson
et al.
,
2007
)
. Furthermore, this appears to apply to much of the sample, since most LMs tend to have unfavorable SRH in the lowest kilometer (Figs. 7b,c,e,f). This could have a couple of impacts: 1) there is a higher tendency for elevated LMs in most environments, and/or 2) LMs are weakened because of this low-level positive SRH. These are supported as RM SRH tends to be larger than LM SRH (Figs. 7b,c,e,f,h,i), signifying that LMs tend to form in low-level environments more supportive of RMs (i.e., cyclonic rotation), consistent with the prevalent climatological wind field in the CONUS
(Homeyer
et al.
,
2025
)
. As such, commonly used surface-based SRH layers are not useful predictors for LM potential and intensity. Instead, 1–3 km SRH better differentiates between the two (Figs. 7h,i), and LM 1–3 km SRH predicts LM potential better than the other LM SRH layers
(Bunkers,
2002
; Edwards
et al.
,
2004
; Bunkers
et al.
,
2024
)
.
Differentiating between severe hail and significant severe hail cases, the only significant (
p
<
<
0.05) differences are 0–1 km shear and LM 1–3 km SRH, which tend to be weaker for significant severe hail (Figs. 8a,d,g; not shown). The only noticeable difference when comparing significant hail cases to the rest of the dataset without hail reports is deep layer shear, which tends to be larger (not shown). LM cases with significant severe wind tend to have weaker 0–1 km shear, higher 0–6 km shear, and weaker SRH for all three layers (not shown).
Figure 8:
As for Fig. 5, except for several kinematic variables.
3.5
Hodographs
Since commonly used shear parameters show little skill in predicting LM intensity, we explore whether the hodograph shape and size may be revealing.
Bunkers (
2002
)
—one of the only studies to look at hodograph shape for LMs—divided each LM hodograph into two groups using the shear vector turning in the lowest 3 km. The first group were classified as clockwise dominated hodographs, accounting for 37% of that dataset, and the second group were classified as straight hodographs, accounting for the remaining 63%. Our results are very similar; 35.2% of our cases have clockwise-curved hodographs, while the remaining 64.8% are classified as straight.
The mean hodographs for all mesoanticyclone strengths show small differences in overall shape (Fig. 9a). All classes follow the veer-back-veer or reverse S-shape hodograph found in prior studies
(Bunkers,
2002
; Bunkers and Stoppkotte,
2007
; Bocheva
et al.
,
2018
; Nixon and Allen,
2022
; Bunkers
et al.
,
2024
)
. In the marginal hodograph, veering in the 9–12 km layer may influence the distribution of precipitation (Fig. 9a). Since most LMs move northeast
(Van Den Broeke
et al.
,
2025
)
, this potential precipitation displacement may lead to a broader inflow region as the precipitation would be distributed towards the south and away from the storm motion. The low levels exhibit considerable veering and thus positive cyclonic SRH, as discussed above. While more than 60.0% of the hodographs are classified as straight, they still exhibited sufficient clockwise curvature in the low levels to skew the mean low-level shape. This clockwise curvature results in positive streamwise vorticity, which is less supportive of anticyclonic rotation
(Davies-Jones,
1984
)
.
Figure 9:
Composite hodographs for a) all mesoanticyclone strengths and mean dataset hodograph, c) cases with hail reports divided by severe, significant severe, and cases without hail reports, and e) cases divided by duration length including those lasting 0–1 hour, 1–2 hours, and those greater than or equal to 2 hours. For c) and e), the bulk wind difference for 0–1 km (BWD01) and 0–6 km (BWD06) layers are included, whereas a) only has the BWD06. b), d), and f) are the same as a), d), and e) respectively, except for the removal of data below the LCL height and adjusted BWD for the 1–6 km layer.
Recall that with increasing mesoanticyclone strength, LMs have higher CAPE and LCLs, with strong cases having the highest median values (Figs. 3b,c,h). Cases with higher CAPE and LCLs likely have deeper cold pools driven by greater precipitation loading and extensive evaporational cooling below the cloud layer, with the potential implication being that more of the low-level hodograph is not being realized by the storm. This would result in less of the clockwise curvature being relevant to the inflow. Restricting the profile to the portion above the LCL heights, the hodograph is more consistent with expectations of anti-streamwise vorticity (Fig. 9b). Although there is still clockwise curvature at and slightly above the LCL height, especially for the marginal cases, the middle portion (e.g., 2–8 km) of the hodographs have counterclockwise turning with height (i.e., anti-streamwise vorticity; Fig. 7h). Since 50% of the marginal cases have an MU level greater than one, these storms are likely elevated and may not realize the clockwise curvature at and above LCL height
(Thompson
et al.
,
2007
)
.
Given the “better-looking” profile for LMs by removing data below the LCL height, LMs may tend to have inflow above and across their cold pools, and/or infrequently have lower-level mesoanticyclones due to the presence of weak to moderately positive SRH in the lower levels. Without the presence of a lower-level mesoanticyclone and subsequent induced vertical PGF, this may mean LMs are more transient and weaker than RMs in the same environment, especially HSLC cases that often depend on the low-level mesocyclone
(Sherburn and Parker,
2014
; Sherburn
et al.
,
2016
; Wade and Parker,
2021
)
. Furthermore, this may partly explain the rarity of tornado production in LMs [see review by
Fischer
et al.
(
2024
)
]. Most of the observed tornadic LM cases are of the landspout or hybrid variety rather than mesoanticyclonic or are closely associated with boundaries
(Hammond,
1967
; Brown and Knupp,
1980
; Monteverdi
et al.
,
2001
; Dostalek
et al.
,
2004
; Bunkers and Stoppkotte,
2007
)
. However, this is not always the case, as there have been higher-end anticyclonic tornadoes likely resulting from LMs with a low-level mesoanticyclone
(Brown and Knupp,
1980
; Monteverdi
et al.
,
2001
)
. This suggests that radar observations and/or modeling studies are required to confirm how frequently LMs have low-level mesoanticyclones.
Separating hodographs by cases that produced severe hail, significant severe hail, and those that did not have any hail reports leads to little difference in overall hodograph structure (Fig. 9c). The largest difference is the amount of backing aloft, especially in the 6–9 km layer, where cases without hail reports have less backing and are straighter versus those with hail reports, which tend to have stronger backing aloft, especially for severe hail. Additionally, the veering in the 9–12 km layer is the most extreme for the cases with severe hail and least extreme for the cases without hail reports (Fig. 9c). Restricting the hodograph with the lowest level at LCL height, the overall structure, especially throughout the layer from LCL to 6 km, is straight, and the cases with hail reports tend to have larger 3–6 km shear (Fig. 9d). Straight hodographs lead to an elongation of the updraft width in the east-west direction and can lead to longer residence time for hail embryos, leading to better conditions for hail growth
(Dennis and Kumjian,
2017
; Kumjian and Lombardo,
2020
; Kumjian
et al.
,
2021
; Pounds
et al.
,
2024
)
. Additionally, this elongation of the updraft may support longer-lived LMs as well, since longer-lived LMs have longer and straighter hodograph structures, leading to larger storm-relative inflow
(Figs. 9e,f; e.g., Bunkers
et al.
,
2006
; Davenport,
2021
)
.
3.6
Composite Parameters
While most parameters struggle with predicting LM strength, there is at least some skill for CAPE, LCL height, 1–3 SRH, and to a lesser extent 0–1 km shear, and EBWD. Combining several of these may provide a useful composite parameter to predict LMs as the current LM supercell composite parameter (SCP), which is derived from MUCAPE, effective-SRH, EBWD, and MUCIN, has no skill in predicting LMs and LM mesoanticyclone intensity (Fig. 10a). The RM SCP does a better job at predicting and differentiating between LM strength categories (Fig. 10b). The main reason for this is likely because LMs occur in environments that support RMs and there is little difference between the two in parameter space. The current SCP relies on the difference in the effective-SRH, and since LMs tend to have positive SRH in at least the lowest kilometer, the SCP does not differentiate well between the two types of supercells. What appears to better differentiate the two types of supercells is the hodograph shape and 1–3 km SRH. The current SCP does not take this into account and we intend to address this in future work, as this requires a more detailed analysis of the spatio-temporal variability of environments given the propensity for cases to be related to boundaries. For now, we advise against operational use of LM SCP based on the results presented here.
Figure 10:
Composite parameters for the LM dataset. a) is the LM supercell composite parameter, b) is the RM supercell composite parameter, c) is the significant hail parameter, and d) is the significant hail parameter divided into two groups: severe hail and significant severe. Statistical significance testing and sample sizes are the same as for Figs. 3 and 5.
Since LMs tend to predominantly produce hail, the significant hail parameter (SHIP) was calculated for each sounding. SHIP increases with mesoanticyclone intensity (Fig. 10c), following the distributions of MUCAPE and 700–500 hPa lapse rates, which are part of the formulation of SHIP. Breaking down all hail cases, the SHIP parameter does statistically differentiate between populations, particularly for the moderate and strong cases; however, these are not consistent enough to rely solely on this parameter to predict significant hail from LMs, consistent with its overall performance for hail
(Fig. 10d; Gensini
et al.
,
2021
)
.
4
Conclusions
This study uses a dataset of 889 observed and quality-controlled LMs, spanning across North America from 2011–2022
(Van Den Broeke
et al.
,
2024
)
. Each case has assigned mesoanticyclone strength (marginal, weak, moderate, and strong) based on the maximum anticyclonic rotation following the
Andra (
1997
)
nomogram. RAP/RUC sounding profiles were obtained for 867 of these cases (22 cases had missing profiles) to compute the nearest inflow parameter space. Commonly used convective metrics, such as lapse rates, CAPE, CIN, LCL height, bulk shear, and SRH, in addition to many others, were calculated for these available profiles in addition to hodograph and skew-T construction to establish a baseline climatology of LM environments. All metrics were broken down by mesoanticyclone strength, hail size, wind speed, and duration of the event to explore potential sources of predictability for these events.
Results suggest that LM environments tend to overlap with RM environments. As such, LMs form in a wide range of CAPE values with the ML interquartile range from
∼
\sim
750–2000 J kg
-
1
and generally highest with increasing mesoanticyclone strength. LM bulk shear metrics are similar to those of RMs and have few differences between LM mesoanticyclone strengths. LM and RM SRH tend to be positive in the lowest kilometer, with varying SRH layers (0–0.5, 0–1, 0–3, and 1–3 km) having little skill in predicting LM strength and potential. The LM 1–3 km SRH best represents LM potential and should be used instead of effective-SRH to forecast LMs. The mean LM hodograph matches prior research with a veer-back-veer or reverse S-shaped hodograph.
Given the lack of anti-streamwise vorticity in the lowest kilometer, we hypothesize that LMs 1) are weakened by the positive SRH, 2) have infrequent or weak lower-level mesoanticyclones, and 3) tend to have inflow above the lowest kilometer (i.e., at LCL height and above). These hypotheses are supported when restricting the hodographs to the LCL height. The hodographs become more favorable for anticyclonically rotating updrafts given the straighter nature (i.e., crosswise vorticity) and backing in the middle portions (i.e., anti-streamwise vorticity). Furthermore, the veering and lack of anti-streamwise vorticity in the low levels most likely retards low-level mesoanticyclone formation, decreasing the potential for tornadoes. Based on case literature, anticyclonic tornadoes can form from LMs, but are more likely formed along the gust front, boundaries, or from the cyclonic vortex pair underneath the updraft.
Since the current SCP solely relies on the sign of the effective SRH to differentiate between LMs and RMs, the LM SCP has no skill in predicting LMs, whereas the RM SCP is better at predicting LM strength. Therefore, we advise not to use the current LM SCP to predict LMs and instead base prediction on the LM 1–3 km SRH and the hodograph structure, especially that above the LCL height. Moreover, the RM SCP may provide utility for forecasting LM strength, but may not be the optimal parameter to do so. New parameters may be needed to assess LM potential.
Since LMs tend to move poleward in the Northern Hemisphere, they may start surface-based and become elevated after crossing towards the cool side of a boundary. With over 40% of LMs with a most-unstable level above the surface in the nearest inflow sounding, we expect the number of cases that become elevated to increase if effectively sampled at a later point in their lifetimes. Successfully transitioning to an elevated state on the cool side of a boundary may aid in the sustenance of a LM due to the increasingly favorable shear profile for anticyclonic rotation
(e.g., Bunkers
et al.
,
2006
)
. This is supported as more than 50% of LMs with analysis periods
≥
\geq
2 hours are elevated, and likely lived longer as they move into a more anticyclonically favorable environment (i.e., the loss of low-level positive SRH). Further research is needed to explore if LM proximity to and crossing of boundaries may be useful in predicting LM potential, severity, and longevity. In RMs, this transition to a more stable environment can either be helpful or detrimental to the storm
(Nowotarski
et al.
,
2011
; Coffer and Parker,
2015
; MacIntosh and Parker,
2017
; Gropp and Davenport,
2018
; Brown
et al.
,
2021
)
, but appears to impact the strength of the low-level mesocyclone. LMs may have a smoother transition across a stable boundary as they are less reliant on this feature and have pre-existing inflow regions that are above the surface. However,
Grasso (
2000
)
suggests that LMs may dissipate quickly after splitting because the storms’ inflow region is dominated by the downdraft-cooled and negatively buoyant air. While this may be the case for some LMs, especially shorter-lived events, further numerical simulations are needed to test our hypotheses and understand the dynamics of LMs, how they physically differ from RMs, and why they predominantly produce hail and rarely produce tornadoes.
The favorable environment for large hail growth, especially if the lowest kilometer is not realized by the storm, may be one reason why LMs predominantly produce hail. LMs with hail reports tend to have steeper lapse rates, larger CAPE, higher LCLs, higher freezing levels, slightly higher 0–6 km shear and EBWD, slightly weaker 0–1 km shear, and weaker LM 1–3 km SRH. The biggest difference in the hodograph structure is that storms with larger hail tend to have stronger shear in the east-west direction, especially in the 3–6 km layer. This is likely to elongate the updraft west to east, allowing for longer residence time in the hail growth region
(Dennis and Kumjian,
2017
; Kumjian and Lombardo,
2020
; Kumjian
et al.
,
2021
; Nixon
et al.
,
2023
)
. Furthermore, there is larger CAPE (largest for significant severe hail cases) within the hail growth region, which has been shown in large hail-producing RMs
(Nixon
et al.
,
2023
)
, potentially leading to rapid hail growth. Lastly, elevated LMs tend to also have favorable profiles for hail generation and account for over 40% of all hail cases, with weaker CAPE concentrated mainly in the hail growth region, and stronger bulk shear.
A potential bias within this work is that the results are based on the single point, nearest inflow RUC/RAP sounding profile for each case. We acknowledge the biases that arise from using a single model and single point sounding from a subjective analysis of the storm’s centroid and inflow region. An analysis of the profiles through each storm’s life may be useful in determining the environmental evolution. As discussed above, the proximity to boundaries is of particular interest given that a transition to elevated storms may aid in LM duration. Additionally, the analysis for the hail and wind reports are based on the nearest inflow sounding at the beginning of the storm’s classification and not the closest sounding to the report. A more representative profile may be the nearest soundings for all of the reports (though these would still not reflect storm modification), which future work could address. We intend to compare the results presented here against other profile data to address whether the changing nature of RAP/RUC (e.g., changing vertical levels and horizontal resolution) through time influences the robustness of the associations shown here.
Lastly, a similar comprehensive climatology of RMs with quantified mesocyclone strength has not yet been developed and would extend the knowledge on the parameter space of RMs and could be compared directly to the research presented here and in
Van Den Broeke
et al.
(
2025
)
. Furthermore, comparing environments (e.g., synoptic, mesoscale, and parameter space) that support strong LMs and weak RMs, weak LMs and strong RMs, equally both components, and similarly for splitting and non-splitting events would help increase forecaster awareness and predictability of the associated hazards.
Acknowledgements.
We thank Cynthia Van Den Broeke, Simon Kirby, Raychel Nelson, Benjamin Schweigert, Amy Conner, and Ashton Cook for developing the manually compiled LM supercell dataset. We also thank Ryan Jewell and Rich Thompson for their help in gathering and developing the storm reports and environmental dataset. Lastly, we thank Matt Bunkers and Cynthia Van Den Broeke for valuable comments on the initial form of this manuscript. This work was supported by the Earth and Ecosystem Science PhD program at Central Michigan University and the National Science Foundation under Grant AGS-2218623.
\datastatement
The LM dataset used in this study can be found at
https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.10551964
, the storm reports can be accessed through the Storm Events Database (
https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/stormevents/
), the environmental RUC/RAP data can be accessed from NCEI (
https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/products/weather-climate-models/rapid-refresh-update
), and the compiled RAP/RUC environmental data for the LM cases can be found at
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15939413
.
References
Jr. Andra (1997)
The origin and evolution of the WSR-88D mesocyclone recognition nomogram
.
In
28th Conf. on Radar Meteorology Amer. Meteor. Soc.
,
Austin, TX
,
pp. 364–365
.
Cited by:
§2
,
§4
.
Aon (2025)
2025 climate catastrophe insight
.
Note:
https://assets.aon.com/-/media/files/aon/reports/2025/2025-climate-catastrophe-insight.pdf
Accessed 30-04-2025
Cited by:
§1
.
W. S. Ashley, A. M. Haberlie, and V. A. Gensini (2023)
The future of supercells in the United States
.
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society
104
(
1
),
pp. E1–E21
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society
External Links:
ISSN 0003-0007, 1520-0477
,
Document
Cited by:
§2
.
P. C. Banacos and D. M. Schultz (2005)
The use of moisture flux convergence in forecasting convective initiation: historical and operational perspectives
.
Weather and Forecasting
20
(
3
),
pp. 351–366
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.2
.
S. G. Benjamin, D. Dévényi, S. S. Weygandt, K. J. Brundage, J. M. Brown, G. A. Grell, D. Kim, B. E. Schwartz, T. G. Smirnova, T. L. Smith, and G. S. Manikin (2004)
An hoextray assimilation–forecast cycle: the RUC
.
Monthly Weather Review
132
(
2
).
Cited by:
§2
.
S. G. Benjamin, S. S. Weygandt, J. M. Brown, M. Hu, C. R. Alexander, T. G. Smirnova, J. B. Olson, E. P. James, D. C. Dowell, G. A. Grell, H. Lin, S. E. Peckham, T. L. Smith, W. R. Moninger, J. S. Kenyon, and G. S. Manikin (2016)
A North American hoextray assimilation and model forecast cycle: the Rapid Refresh
.
Monthly Weather Review
144
(
4
),
pp. 1669–1694
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Monthly Weather Review
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0493, 0027-0644
,
Document
Cited by:
§2
.
S. F. Blair, J. W. Leighton, B. L. Barjenbruch, W. P. Gargan, D. R. Deroche, and J. M. Boustead (2011)
A radar-based assessment of the detectability of giant hail
.
E-Journal of Severe Storms Meteorology
,
pp. 1–30
.
Cited by:
§1
.
L. Bocheva, T. Dimitrova, R. Penchev, I. Gospodinov, and P. Simeonov (2018)
Severe convective supercell outbreak over western Bulgaria on July 8, 2014
.
Időjárás
122
(
2
),
pp. 177–202
.
External Links:
ISSN 03246329
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.5
.
P. D. Bothwell, J. A. Hart, and R. L. Thompson (2002)
An integrated three-dimensional objective analysis scheme in use at the Storm Prediction Center
.
In
21st Conf. on Severe Local Storms, San Antonio, TX
,
pp. JP3.1
.
Cited by:
§2
.
J. C. Brimelow (1999)
Numerical modelling of hailstone growth in Alberta storms
.
Master’s Thesis
,
University of Alberta,
.
Cited by:
§3.2
.
J. C. Brimelow, G. W. Reuter, and E. R. Poolman (2002)
Modeling maximum hail size in Alberta thunderstorms
.
Weather and Forecasting
17
(
5
),
pp. 1048–1062
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.2
.
J. M. Brown and K. R. Knupp (1980)
The Iowa cyclonic-anticyclonic tornado pair and its parent thunderstorm
.
Monthly Weather Review
108
(
10
),
pp. 1626–1646
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Monthly Weather Review
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0493, 0027-0644
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§3.5
.
M. C. Brown, C. J. Nowotarski, A. R. Dean, B. T. Smith, R. L. Thompson, and J. M. Peters (2021)
The early evening transition in southeastern U.S. tornado environments
.
Weather and Forecasting
36
(
4
),
pp. 1431–1452
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
R. A. Brown and R. J. Meitín (1994)
Evolution and morphology of two splitting thunderstorms with dominant left-moving members
.
Monthly Weather Review
122
(
9
),
pp. 2052–2067
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Monthly Weather Review
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0493, 0027-0644
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§2
.
M. J. Bunkers, J. S. Johnson, L. J. Czepyha, J. M. Grzywacz, B. A. Klimowski, and M. R. Hjelmfelt (2006)
An observational examination of long-lived supercells. Part II: environmental conditions and forecasting
.
Weather and Forecasting
21
(
5
),
pp. 689–714
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.4
,
§3.5
,
§4
.
M. J. Bunkers, B. A. Klimowski, J. W. Zeitler, R. L. Thompson, and M. L. Weisman (2000)
Predicting supercell motion using a new hodograph technique
.
Weather and Forecasting
15
(
1
),
pp. 61–79
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
M. J. Bunkers and J. W. Stoppkotte (2007)
Documentation of a rare tornadic left-moving supercell
.
E-Journal of Severe Storms Meteorology
2
(
2
),
pp. 1–22
.
Note:
Number: 2
External Links:
ISSN 1559-5404
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
,
§3.5
,
§3.5
.
M. J. Bunkers, M. S. Van Den Broeke, and J. T. Allen (2024)
An update for predicting left-moving supercell motion
.
Weather and Forecasting
39
(
12
),
pp. 1777–1794
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§2
,
§2
,
§3.4
,
§3.4
,
§3.5
.
M. J. Bunkers (2002)
Vertical wind shear associated with left-moving supercells
.
Weather and Forecasting
17
(
4
),
pp. 845–855
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
,
§3.2
,
§3.4
,
§3.5
,
§3.5
.
D. W. Burgess (1981)
Evidence for anticyclonic rotation in left-moving thunderstorms
.
In
20th Conf. on Radar Meteorology, Boston, MA
,
pp. 52–54
.
Cited by:
§1
.
J. Charba and Y. Sasaki (1971)
Structure and movement of the severe thunderstorms of 3 April 1964 as revealed from radar and surface mesonetwork data analysis
.
Journal of the Meteorological Society of Japan. Ser. II
49
(
3
),
pp. 191–214
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
B. E. Coffer and M. D. Parker (2015)
Impacts of increasing low-level shear on supercells during the early evening transition
.
Monthly Weather Review
143
(
5
),
pp. 1945–1969
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
B. E. Coffer, M. Taszarek, and M. D. Parker (2020)
Near-ground wind profiles of tornadic and nontornadic environments in the United States and Europe from ERA5 reanalyses
.
Weather and Forecasting
35
(
6
),
pp. 2621–2638
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§2
.
M. C. Coniglio and R. E. Jewell (2022)
SPC mesoscale analysis compared to field-project soundings: implications for supercell environment studies
.
Monthly Weather Review
150
(
3
),
pp. 567–588
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§2
.
M. C. Coniglio (2012)
Verification of RUC 0–1-h forecasts and SPC mesoscale analyses using VORTEX2 soundings
.
Weather and Forecasting
27
(
3
),
pp. 667–683
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§2
.
J.P. Craven and H. Brooks (2004)
Baseline climatology of sounding derived parameters associated with deep, moist convection
.
Natl. Wea. Dig.
28
,
pp. 13–24
.
Cited by:
§3.2
.
C. E. Davenport (2021)
Environmental evolution of long-lived supercell thunderstorms in the Great Plains
.
Weather and Forecasting
36
(
6
),
pp. 2187–2209
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.4
,
§3.5
.
J. M. Davies and R. H. Johns (1993)
Some wind and instability parameters associated with strong and violent tornadoes: 1. wind shear and helicity
.
In
The Tornado: Its Structure, Dynamics, Prediction, and Hazards
,
pp. 573–582
.
External Links:
ISBN 9781118664148
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.4
.
R. Davies-Jones, D. W. Burgess, and M. Foster (1990)
Test of helicity as a tornado forecast parameter
.
In
Preprints, 16th Conf. on Severe Local Storms, Kananaskis Park, AB, Canada, Amer. Meteor. Soc.
,
pp. 588–592
.
Cited by:
§3.4
.
R. Davies-Jones (1984)
Streamwise vorticity: the origin of updraft rotation in supercell storms
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
41
(
20
),
pp. 2991–3006
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
External Links:
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
,
§3.5
.
R. Davies-Jones (2002)
Linear and nonlinear propagation of supercell storms
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
59
,
pp. 3178–3205
(
EN
).
External Links:
Document
,
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
Cited by:
§1
.
R. Davies-Jones (2015)
A review of supercell and tornado dynamics
.
Atmospheric Research
158-159
,
pp. 274–291
.
External Links:
ISSN 01698095
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
E. J. Dennis and M. R. Kumjian (2017)
The impact of vertical wind shear on hail growth in simulated supercells
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
74
(
3
),
pp. 641–663
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
External Links:
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.5
,
§4
.
J. F. Dostalek, J. F. Weaver, and G. L. Phillips (2004)
Aspects of a tornadic left-moving thunderstorm of 25 May 1999
.
Weather and Forecasting
19
(
3
),
pp. 614–626
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
,
§3.5
.
R. Edwards and S. J. Hodanish (2006)
Photographic documentation and environmental analysis of an intense, anticyclonic supercell on the Colorado plains
.
Monthly Weather Review
134
(
12
),
pp. 3753–3763
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Monthly Weather Review
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0493, 0027-0644
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
R. Edwards, R. L. Thompson, and C. M. Mead (2004)
Assessment of anticyclonic supercell environments using close proximity soundings from the RUC model.
.
22d Conf. on Severe Local Storms, Hyannis, MA, Amer. Meteor. Soc.
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
,
§1
,
§3.4
.
R. Edwards and R. L. Thompson (1998)
Nationwide comparisons of hail size with WSR-88D vertically integrated liquid water and derived thermodynamic sounding data
.
Weather and Forecasting
13
(
2
),
pp. 277–285
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.2
,
§3.2
.
J. M. Esterheld and D. J. Giuliano (2008)
Discriminating between tornadic and non-tornadic supercells: a new hodograph technique
.
E-Journal of Severe Storms Meteorology
3
(
2
),
pp. 1–50
.
Note:
Number: 2
External Links:
ISSN 1559-5404
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.4
.
J. Fischer, J. M. L. Dahl, B. E. Coffer, J. L. Houser, P. M. Markowski, M. D. Parker, C. C. Weiss, and A. Schueth (2024)
Supercell tornadogenesis: recent progress in our state of understanding
.
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society
105
(
7
),
pp. E1084–E1097
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society
External Links:
ISSN 0003-0007, 1520-0477
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.5
.
T. Fujita and H. Grandoso (1968)
Split of a thunderstorm into anticyclonic and cyclonic storms and their motion as determined from numerical model experiments
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
25
(
3
),
pp. 416–439
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
External Links:
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
V. A. Gensini, C. Converse, W. S. Ashley, and M. Taszarek (2021)
Machine learning classification of significant tornadoes and hail in the United States using ERA5 proximity soundings
.
Weather and Forecasting
36
(
6
),
pp. 2143–2160
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3.2
,
§3.6
.
A. Giordani, M. Kunz, K. M. Bedka, H. J. Punge, T. Paccagnella, V. Pavan, I. M. L. Cerenzia, and S. Di Sabatino (2024)
Characterizing hail-prone environments using convection-permitting reanalysis and overshooting top detections over south-central Europe
.
Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences
24
(
7
),
pp. 2331–2357
.
Note:
Publisher: Copernicus GmbH
External Links:
ISSN 1561-8633
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.2
.
N. A. Goldacker and M. D. Parker (2023)
Assessing the comparative effects of storm-relative helicity components within right-moving supercell environments
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
80
(
12
),
pp. 2805–2822
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
External Links:
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.4
.
B. N. Grant (1995)
Elevated cold-sector severe thunderstorms: a preliminary study
.
National Weather Digest
19
(
4
),
pp. 1–7
.
Cited by:
§3.2
.
L. D. Grasso and E. R. Hilgendorf (2001)
Observations of a severe left moving thunderstorm
.
Weather and Forecasting
16
(
4
),
pp. 500–511
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
L. D. Grasso (2000)
The dissipation of a left-moving cell in a severe storm environment
.
Monthly Weather Review
128
(
8
),
pp. 2797–2815
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Monthly Weather Review
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0493, 0027-0644
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§4
.
P.H. Groenemeijer and A. Van Delden (2007)
Sounding-derived parameters associated with large hail and tornadoes in the Netherlands
.
Atmospheric Research
83
(
2
),
pp. 473–487
.
External Links:
ISSN 01698095
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.2
.
M. E. Gropp and C. E. Davenport (2018)
The impact of the nocturnal transition on the lifetime and evolution of supercell thunderstorms in the Great Plains
.
Weather and Forecasting
33
(
4
),
pp. 1045–1061
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
P. Gunturi and M. Tippett (2017)
Impact of ENSO on U.S. tornado and hail frequencies
.
Note:
https://www.columbia.edu/~mkt14/files/WillisRe_Impact_of_ENSO_on_US_Tornado_and_Hail_frequencies_Final.pdf
page 5.Accessed 30-04-2025
Cited by:
§1
.
Jr. Hales (1988)
Improving the watch/warning program through use of significant event data
.
In
Preprints, 15th Conf. on Severe Local Storms
,
Baltimore, MD
,
pp. 165–168
.
Cited by:
§2
.
G. R. Hammond (1967)
Study of a left moving thunderstorm of 23 April 1964
.
ESSA technical memorandum. IERTM-NSSL
,
U.S. Department of Commerce, Environmental Science Services Administration, Institutes for Environmental Research, National Severe Storms Laboratory
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§3.5
.
C. R. Homeyer, M. J. Bunkers, J. T. Allen, and A. M. Murphy (2025)
United states supercell storms and their severity: a 14-yr radar-based climatology
.
Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
,
§1
,
§2
,
§3.1
,
§3.4
.
K. L. Horgan, D. M. Schultz, J. E. Hales, S. F. Corfidi, and R. H. Johns (2007)
A five-year climatology of elevated severe convective storms in the United States east of the Rocky Mountains
.
Weather and Forecasting
22
(
5
),
pp. 1031–1044
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.2
.
R. A. Houze, W. Schmid, R. G. Fovell, and H.-H. Schiesser (1993)
Hailstorms in Switzerland: left movers, right movers, and false hooks
.
Monthly Weather Review
121
(
12
),
pp. 3345–3370
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Monthly Weather Review
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0493, 0027-0644
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§2
.
R. Jewell and J. Brimelow (2009)
Evaluation of Alberta hail growth model using severe hail proximity soundings from the United States
.
Weather and Forecasting
24
(
6
),
pp. 1592–1609
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.2
.
A. W. Johnson and K. E. Sugden (2014)
Evaluation of sounding-derived thermodynamic and wind-related parameters associated with large hail events
.
E-Journal of Severe Storms Meteorology
9
(
5
),
pp. 1–42
.
External Links:
ISSN 1559-5404
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§3.2
.
T. A. Jones and C. Nixon (2017)
Short-term forecasts of left-moving supercells from an experimental Warn-on-Forecast system
.
Journal of Operational Meteorology
05
(
13
),
pp. 161–170
.
External Links:
ISSN 23256184
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
J. B. Klemp (1987)
Dynamics of tornadic thunderstorms
.
Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics
19
,
pp. 369–402
.
Note:
Publisher: Annual Reviews
External Links:
ISSN 0066-4189, 1545-4479
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
J. B. Klemp and R. B. Wilhelmson (1978)
The simulation of three-dimensional convective storm dynamics
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
35
(
6
),
pp. 1070–1096
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
External Links:
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
M. R. Kumjian, K. Lombardo, and S. Loeffler (2021)
The evolution of hail production in simulated supercell storms
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
78
(
11
),
pp. 3417–3440
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
External Links:
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.5
,
§4
.
M. R. Kumjian and K. Lombardo (2020)
A hail growth trajectory model for exploring the environmental controls on hail size: model physics and idealized tests
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
77
(
8
),
pp. 2765–2791
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
External Links:
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.5
,
§4
.
C. Lepore, J. Allen, and R. Abernathey (2021)
Xcape
.
Zenodo
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§2
.
Y. Lin and M. R. Kumjian (2022)
Influences of CAPE on hail production in simulated supercell storms
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
79
(
1
),
pp. 179–204
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
External Links:
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.3
.
D. T. Lindsey and M. J. Bunkers (2005)
Observations of a severe, left-moving supercell on 4 May 2003
.
Weather and Forecasting
20
(
1
),
pp. 15–22
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
.
C. W. MacIntosh and M. D. Parker (2017)
The 6 May 2010 elevated supercell during VORTEX2
.
Monthly Weather Review
145
(
7
),
pp. 2635–2657
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Monthly Weather Review
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0493, 0027-0644
,
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
P. Markowski and Y. Richardson (2010)
Mesoscale meteorology in midlatitudes
.
John Wiley & Sons
.
Cited by:
§3.2
.
J. P. Monteverdi, W. Blier, G. Stumpf, W. Pi, and K. Anderson (2001)
First WSR-88D documentation of an anticyclonic supercell with anticyclonic tornadoes: the Sunnyvale–Los Altos, California, tornadoes of 4 May 1998
.
Monthly Weather Review
129
(
11
),
pp. 2805–2814
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Monthly Weather Review
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0493, 0027-0644
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§3.5
.
MunichRe (2025)
Natural disaster figures 2024
.
Note:
https://www.munichre.com/content/dam/munichre/mrwebsitespressreleases/MunichRe-Mediarelease2025-NatCat2024.pdf
Accessed 30-04-2025
Cited by:
§1
.
J. W. Nielsen-Gammon and W. L. Read (1995)
Detection and interpretation of left-moving severe thunderstorms using the WSR-88D: a case study
.
Weather and Forecasting
10
(
1
),
pp. 127–140
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
C. J. Nixon, J. T. Allen, and M. Taszarek (2023)
Hodographs and skew Ts of hail-producing storms
.
Weather and Forecasting
38
(
11
),
pp. 2217–2236
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.2
,
§3.2
,
§3.3
,
§3.3
,
§4
.
C. J. Nixon and J. T. Allen (2022)
Distinguishing between hodographs of severe hail and tornadoes
.
Weather and Forecasting
37
(
10
),
pp. 1761–1782
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
,
§3.2
,
§3.5
.
C. J. Nowotarski, P. M. Markowski, and Y. P. Richardson (2011)
The characteristics of numerically simulated supercell storms situated over statically stable boundary layers
.
Monthly Weather Review
139
(
10
),
pp. 3139–3162
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Monthly Weather Review
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0493, 0027-0644
,
Document
Cited by:
§4
.
J. M. Peters, C. J. Nowotarski, and H. Morrison (2019)
The role of vertical wind shear in modulating maximum supercell updraft velocities
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
76
(
10
),
pp. 3169–3189
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
External Links:
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.3
,
§3.3
.
J. M. Peters, C. J. Nowotarski, and G. L. Mullendore (2020)
Are supercells resistant to entrainment because of their rotation?
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
77
(
4
),
pp. 1475–1495
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
External Links:
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.3
,
§3.3
.
L. E. Pounds, C. L. Ziegler, R. D. Adams-Selin, and M. I. Biggerstaff (2024)
Analysis of hail production via simulated hailstone trajectories in the 29 May 2012 Kingfisher, Oklahoma, supercell
.
Monthly Weather Review
152
(
1
),
pp. 245–276
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Monthly Weather Review
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0493, 0027-0644
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.5
.
T. Púčik, P. Groenemeijer, D. Rýva, and M. Kolář (2015)
Proximity soundings of severe and nonsevere thunderstorms in central Europe
.
Monthly Weather Review
143
(
12
),
pp. 4805–4821
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Monthly Weather Review
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0493, 0027-0644
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.2
.
E. N. Rasmussen and D. O. Blanchard (1998)
A baseline climatology of sounding-derived supercell and tornado forecast parameters
.
Weather and Forecasting
13
(
4
),
pp. 1148–1164
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3.2
.
D. W. Reif and H. B. Bluestein (2017)
A 20-year climatology of nocturnal convection initiation over the central and southern Great Plains during the warm season
.
Monthly Weather Review
145
(
5
),
pp. 1615–1639
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Monthly Weather Review
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0493, 0027-0644
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.2
.
D. M. Romps and Z. Kuang (2010a)
Do undiluted convective plumes exist in the upper tropical troposphere?
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
67
(
2
),
pp. 468–484
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
External Links:
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.3
.
D. M. Romps and Z. Kuang (2010b)
Nature versus nurture in shallow convection
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
67
(
5
),
pp. 1655–1666
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
External Links:
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.3
.
R. Rotunno and J. Klemp (1985)
On the rotation and propagation of simulated supercell thunderstorms
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
42
(
3
),
pp. 271–292
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
External Links:
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
K. D. Sherburn, M. D. Parker, J. R. King, and G. M. Lackmann (2016)
Composite environments of severe and nonsevere high-shear, low-CAPE convective events
.
Weather and Forecasting
31
(
6
),
pp. 1899–1927
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3.3
,
§3.5
.
K. D. Sherburn and M. D. Parker (2014)
Climatology and ingredients of significant severe convection in high-shear, low-CAPE environments
.
Weather and Forecasting
29
(
4
),
pp. 854–877
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3.3
,
§3.5
.
B. T. Smith, R. L. Thompson, J. S. Grams, C. Broyles, and H. E. Brooks (2012)
Convective modes for significant severe thunderstorms in the contiguous United States. Part I: storm classification and climatology
.
Weather and Forecasting
27
(
5
),
pp. 1114–1135
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§2
,
§3.1
.
R. C. Srivastava (1985)
A simple model of evaporatively driven downdraft: application to microburst downdraft
.
Journal of Atmospheric Sciences
42
(
10
),
pp. 1004–1023
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3.2
.
R. L. Thompson, R. Edwards, J. A. Hart, K. L. Elmore, and P. Markowski (2003)
Close proximity soundings within supercell environments obtained from the Rapid Update Cycle
.
Weather and Forecasting
18
(
6
),
pp. 1243–1261
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.2
.
R. L. Thompson, C. M. Mead, and R. Edwards (2007)
Effective storm-relative helicity and bulk shear in supercell thunderstorm environments
.
Weather and Forecasting
22
(
1
),
pp. 102–115
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Weather and Forecasting
External Links:
ISSN 1520-0434, 0882-8156
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.4
,
§3.5
.
M. Tonn, J. Wilhelm, and M. Kunz (2023)
Evaluating Bunkers’ storm motion of hail-producing supercells and their storm-relative helicity in Germany
.
Meteorologische Zeitschrift
32
,
pp. 229–243
(
en
).
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
.
M. Van Den Broeke, C. Van Den Broeke, S. Kirby, B. Schweigert, and R. Nelson (2024)
Left-moving supercells with polarimetric data available, 2011–2022
.
Zenodo
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§2
,
§4
.
M. Van Den Broeke, C. Van Den Broeke, and B. Schweigert (2025)
Spatiotemporal characteristics of anticyclonic supercells in the contiguous United States
.
J. Appl. Meteor. Climatol., in review
.
Cited by:
§2
,
§3.3
,
§3.5
,
§4
.
A. R. Wade and M. D. Parker (2021)
Dynamics of simulated high-shear, low-CAPE supercells
.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
78
(
5
),
pp. 1389–1410
.
Note:
Publisher: American Meteorological Society
Section: Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
External Links:
ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.3
,
§3.5
.
R. M. Wakimoto (1985)
Forecasting dry microburst activity over the High Plains
.
Monthly Weather Review
113
(
7
),
pp. 1131–1143
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3.2
.
M. L. Weisman and J. B. Klemp (1986)
Characteristics of isolated convective storms
.
In
Mesoscale Meteorology and Forecasting
,
P. S. Ray (Ed.)
,
pp. 331–358
.
External Links:
ISBN 978-1-935704-20-1
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
A. W. Zeeb, W. S. Ashley, A. M. Haberlie, V. A. Gensini, and A. C. Michaelis (2024)
Supercell precipitation contribution to the United States hydroclimate
.
International Journal of Climatology
44
(
5
),
pp. 1489–1512
.
Note:
_eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/joc.8395
External Links:
ISSN 1097-0088
,
Document
Cited by:
§2
.
J. Zeitler and M. Bunkers (2005)
Operational forecasting of supercell motion: review and case studies using multiple datasets
.
National Weather Digest
29
,
pp. 81–97
.
Cited by:
§1
.
E. J. Zipser (2003)
Some views on “hot towers” after 50 years of tropical field programs and two years of TRMM data
.
In
Cloud Systems, Hurricanes, and the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM): A Tribute to Dr. Joanne Simpson
,
W. Tao and R. Adler (Eds.)
,
pp. 49–58
.
External Links:
ISBN 978-1-878220-63-9
,
Document
Cited by:
§3.3
.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA