Testing ΛCDM versus dynamical dark energy in one year: A DESI spectroscopic follow-up program for Rubin supernovae
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
I
Introduction
I.1
A brief review of supernova cosmology
I.2
Improving beyond current supernova datasets
I.3
The Rubin Observatory and the need for spectroscopic follow-up
I.4
Cross-survey synergies and a window of opportunity for DESI
I.5
Paper outline
II
Not all redshifts are created equal: where new supernovae help most
II.1
Toy model
II.2
Baseline data and choice of fiducial cosmology
II.3
Results
III
Rubin light curve simulation
III.1
Filters, cadences, exposure times
III.2
Light curve and cosmology simulation
III.2.1
SN-to-SN variability
III.2.2
Calibration and supernova model
III.3
Redshift completeness
IV
DESI spectroscopic follow-up
IV.1
Depths at nominal effective exposure times
IV.1.1
Generating noisy spectra
IV.1.2
Results and discussion
IV.2
Scheduling spectroscopic follow-ups
IV.2.1
Volume-limited SNe Ia and “noise”
IV.2.2
DESI tile availability
IV.2.3
Observability of generated supernovae
IV.2.4
Active trigger: Scheduling follow-ups
IV.2.5
Follow-up results
IV.3
Spectroscopic follow-up discussion
V
Results
V.1
Cosmology forecast
V.2
The importance to evaluate combined surveys
V.3
Impact of systematics on cosmology
VI
Potential Enhancements
VI.1
Spectroscopic standardization
as an independent cross-check
VI.2
Further synergies and future surveys
VI.2.1
Training Rubin pipelines
VI.2.2
Optimal redshifts for
w
0
w_{0}
and
w
a
w_{a}
in the future
VI.2.3
Low redshifts: Rubin micro and twilight surveys
VI.2.4
Medium redshifts: Deep Drilling Field follow-ups
VI.2.5
DESI-II
VII
Conclusions
Acknowledgements
References
A
Fisher matrix formalism
A.1
Combining new SNe with existing data
A.2
Figure of Merit and distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM
B
Simulations and systematics
B.1
Supernova generation and light curve simulation
B.2
Model fitting error
B.3
Fitting process and calculation of distance modulus covariance matrix
B.3.1
Cosmology forecast
C
Toy model to calculate supernova Ia yield
D
Exposure time calculations and custom scheduling
D.1
Impact of SN brightness distribution
D.2
Impact of redshift binning
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2604.18859v1 [astro-ph.CO] 20 Apr 2026
Testing
Λ
\Lambda
CDM versus dynamical dark energy in one year:
A DESI spectroscopic follow-up program for Rubin supernovae
Jannik Truong
Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
[
Greg Aldering
E.O. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Rd., Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA
galdering@lbl.gov
Saul Perlmutter
Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
E.O. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Rd., Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA
saul@lbl.gov
David Rubin
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa, Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96822
drubin@hawaii.edu
David Schlegel
E.O. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Rd., Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA
djschlegel@lbl.gov
Abstract
Combined cosmological probes currently indicate that best-fit values in the
w
0
−
w
a
w_{0}-w_{a}
parametrization of dynamical dark energy deviate from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM by
∼
3
​
σ
\sim 3\sigma
. In this work, we present a supernova survey capable of measuring dynamical dark energy at the
>
5
​
σ
>5\sigma
level with just one year of data, starting in 2027.
We first show that with the present values of
w
0
w_{0}
and
w
a
w_{a}
, new SNe Ia at redshifts
z
≲
0.6
z\lesssim 0.6
near dark energy-matter equality would add the most constraining power. This is well within reach of the Vera C. Rubin Observatory and the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI).
Because cosmology measurements with SNe Ia quickly become systematics-limited, we focus on eliminating key systematics by using only a spectroscopically confirmed and volume-limited sample.
In our proposed survey, SN alerts from Rubin would actively re-prioritize the scheduling of already-planned DESI tile visits. This would yield 7 500 near-peak transient spectra in one year without delaying DESI’s primary survey.
We forecast that if current best-fit
w
0
−
w
a
w_{0}-w_{a}
values persist, combining just our volume-limited subset of 2 300 new SNe Ia at
z
<
0.3
z<0.3
with current SN, BAO, and CMB data would push the tension with
Λ
\Lambda
CDM beyond
5
​
σ
5\sigma
. This applies across a wide range of assumed uncertainties.
To further circumvent systematics, we explore how DESI enables spectroscopic standardization via machine learning, offering a path toward a cosmology measurement independent of light-curve-based standardization. Finally, we discuss how early results from this program could inform future dark energy experiments.
\uat
Cosmology343 —
\uat
Dark energy351 —
\uat
Type Ia supernovae1728 —
\uat
Surveys1671
†
†
software:
astropy
(Astropy Collaboration
et al.
,
2013
,
2018
,
2022
)
,
numpy
(Harris
et al.
,
2020
)
, matplotlib
(Hunter,
2007
)
,
SNCosmo
(Barbary
et al.
,
2016
)
,
wfirst-sim
(Rubin
et al.
,
2025b
)
.
show]jannik@berkeley.edu
I
Introduction
Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) enabled the discovery of dark energy
(Riess
et al.
,
1998
; Perlmutter
et al.
,
1999
)
. For over two decades, a cosmological constant remained consistent with observations. But recent analyses suggest that dark energy may be dynamical. SN Ia data were the first to show hints of an evolving equation of state
(Rubin
et al.
,
2025a
)
, and Baryon Acoustic Oscillation (BAO) measurements from the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument
(Abdul Karim
et al.
,
2025
)
have significantly strengthened the case: Current best-fit values for the
w
0
w_{0}
and
w
a
w_{a}
parameters of dynamical dark energy are
∼
3
​
σ
\sim 3\,\sigma
away from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM when data from SNe, BAO and the cosmic microwave background (CMB) are combined (
Figure
1
).
The current level of resources being focused on the dark energy question is unparalleled: Large-scale “Stage-IV”
(Albrecht
et al.
,
2006
)
experiments such as DESI
(DESI Collaboration
et al.
,
2016
)
, Euclid
(Euclid Collaboration
et al.
,
2025
)
and the Vera C. Rubin Observatory
(Ivezić
et al.
,
2019
)
are taking data with the goal of measuring dark energy with more precision than ever before. More surveys will soon launch, including the Roman Space Telescope
(Spergel
et al.
,
2015
)
, Lazuli Space Telescope
(Roy
et al.
,
2026
)
, and potentially DESI-II. At the same time, hints of evolving dark energy motivate a rapidly expanding body of theoretical work aimed at explaining these new observations
(Shlivko and Steinhardt,
2024
; Lodha
et al.
,
2025
; Wolf and Read,
2025
)
.
Our goal with this paper is to find a fast and timely means of testing
Λ
\Lambda
CDM versus dynamical dark energy at the
>
5
​
σ
>5\sigma
level with supernovae — by marshalling the tremendous resources provided by current and upcoming experiments.
Reaching
5
​
σ
5\sigma
confidence that dark energy is dynamical would both add momentum to theoretical efforts and steer the design of future dark energy surveys, many of which were conceptualized without considering a potential departure from the
Λ
\Lambda
CDM paradigm.
Given that CMB and DESI BAO data alone are projected to only reach a
3.9
​
σ
3.9\sigma
confidence on dynamical dark energy even with the extension of DESI (Haruki Ebina, priv. comm.), Type Ia supernovae remain essential for crossing the
5
​
σ
5\sigma
discovery threshold.
Figure 1:
Reconstructed
1
​
σ
1\sigma
and
2
​
σ
2\sigma
Gaussian contours for
w
0
w_{0}
and
w
a
w_{a}
from different datasets: Union3
(Rubin
et al.
,
2025a
)
SNe Ia only (blue), DESI DR2 BAO+Planck CMB without SNe (green,
Abdul Karim
et al.
(
2025
)
), and all three combined (orange). When combining all three datasets,
Λ
\Lambda
CDM (
w
0
=
−
1
w_{0}=-1
and
w
a
=
0
w_{a}=0
, top left black point) is
3.8
​
σ
3.8\sigma
from the best-fit values.
I.1
A brief review of supernova cosmology
Supernova cosmology uses the standardizable luminosity of Type Ia supernovae to map the expansion history of the universe, thereby measuring the strength of dark energy over cosmic time.
Transients such as SNe Ia are discovered by repeat observations of the same patch of the sky. Ideally, a discovered transient receives live spectroscopic follow-up, giving a redshift measurement and classification. SNe Ia are uniquely identifiable by strong spectral features of singly ionized silicon, SiII, as well as the lack of hydrogen and helium lines found in many core-collapse supernovae
(Filippenko,
1997
)
.
Supernova light curves, obtained by difference imaging in multiple filters, are important for standardization: Unstandardized absolute magnitudes have a root-mean-square scatter of
0.4
mag
0.4\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
, corresponding to a distance uncertainty of
18
%
18\%
. To improve cosmological distance measurements, SNe Ia are empirically standardized
(Phillips,
1993
)
using parameters from fits to light curve models such as
SALT
(Guy
et al.
,
2007
; Kenworthy
et al.
,
2021
)
or
SNooPY
(Burns
et al.
,
2011
)
. This procedure extracts a peak magnitude
m
B
m_{B}
, a stretch parameter
x
1
x_{1}
, and a color parameter
c
c
. In the simplest approach, these parameters are combined via the Tripp relation
(Tripp,
1998
)
m
B
corr
=
m
B
+
α
​
x
1
−
β
​
c
\displaystyle m_{B}^{\mathrm{corr}}=m_{B}+\alpha x_{1}-\beta c
(1)
where
α
\alpha
and
β
\beta
are nuisance parameters fit from the data. The stretch parameter captures the width of the light curve: SNe with broader, slower-declining light curves (
x
1
>
0
x_{1}>0
) are intrinsically more luminous and thus appear brighter than average. The color parameter captures reddening: redder SNe (
c
>
0
c>0
) appear fainter, whether due to dust extinction or intrinsic variation. Both effects must be corrected for to recover the standardized magnitude, and thus distance. After standardization, the scatter in SN Ia magnitudes typically reduces to
∼
\sim
0.15
mag
0.15\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
, or a distance uncertainty of
∼
7
%
\sim 7\%
. This residual scatter is often called “unexplained dispersion”.
The corrected supernova magnitudes and redshifts are fit to the theoretical prediction
m
B
​
(
z
)
=
5
​
log
10
⁡
𝒟
L
​
(
z
|
w
0
,
w
a
,
Ω
M
)
+
ℳ
\displaystyle m_{B}(z)=5\log_{10}\mathcal{D}_{L}(z|w_{0},w_{a},\Omega_{M})+\mathcal{M}
(2)
where
𝒟
L
=
H
0
​
d
L
/
c
\mathcal{D}_{L}=H_{0}d_{L}/c
is the dimensionless luminosity distance. Constants are absorbed into the nuisance parameter
ℳ
=
M
+
5
​
log
10
⁡
(
c
/
H
0
/
10
​
pc
)
\mathcal{M}=M+5\log_{10}(c/H_{0}/10\,\rm{pc})
, where
M
M
is the mean absolute magnitude of the supernova (e.g.
Perlmutter
et al.
1997
). In practice, fits are often performed to the distance moduli
μ
=
m
−
M
\mu=m-M
, which is an entirely equivalent procedure.
To evaluate dynamical dark energy, we assume a flat
w
0
​
w
a
w_{0}w_{a}
CDM cosmology and use the Chevallier-Polarski-Linder parameterization
(Chevallier and Polarski,
2001
; Linder,
2003
)
w
​
(
a
)
=
w
0
+
w
a
​
(
1
−
a
)
\displaystyle w(a)=w_{0}+w_{a}(1-a)
(3)
to describe the evolving dark energy equation of state
w
=
p
/
ρ
w=p/\rho
, where setting
w
0
=
−
1
w_{0}=-1
and
w
a
=
0
w_{a}=0
recovers
Λ
\Lambda
CDM.
I.2
Improving beyond current supernova datasets
Three major supernova datasets exist, all containing 1500 to 2000 SNe Ia. Pantheon+
(Brout
et al.
,
2022
)
and Union3
(Rubin
et al.
,
2025a
)
compile spectroscopically confirmed SNe Ia across various programs from the literature. There is significant overlap in the included SNe, even though analysis techniques differ. In contrast, the
z
>
0.1
z>0.1
SNe from the Dark Energy Survey
(DES Collaboration
et al.
,
2024
; Popovic
et al.
,
2025b
)
are all obtained by the same instrument, achieving more consistent photometric calibration. However, the DES sample is partially contaminated by non-Ia supernovae, as a large part of the sample was not confirmed spectroscopically by examining spectral features, but only photometrically classified based on their light curves, introducing new uncertainties.
The next step for supernova cosmology is thus to combine the strengths of these surveys, eliminating critical systematics: A photometrically homogeneous sample combined with rigorous spectroscopic follow-up would be a major improvement — even without increasing the total number of supernovae significantly.
However, even a sample like that must contend with selection effects. In magnitude-limited surveys, Malmquist bias
(Malmquist,
1925
)
occurs because intrinsically brighter supernovae are preferentially detected and followed up, skewing distance measurements on the Hubble diagram. To avoid this, we aim for a well-defined volume-limited subsample within the broader survey. Because a volume-limited sample includes all supernovae within a given distance regardless of their intrinsic brightness, it natively circumvents this bias. This eliminates the need for selection-effect corrections
(Kessler and Scolnic,
2017
)
that themselves introduce correlated uncertainties.
I.3
The Rubin Observatory and the need for spectroscopic follow-up
The Vera C. Rubin Observatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST,
Ivezić
et al.
2019
), a wide-field ground-based optical survey with broad science goals, is well positioned to deliver the required photometric homogeneity described above. Beginning in 2026, Rubin will deliver unprecedented statistics, measuring an estimated hundreds of thousands of new SNe Ia over ten years
(LSST Science Collaboration
et al.
,
2009
; The LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration
et al.
,
2018
)
; cosmological analyses using these SNe will thus be limited by systematic uncertainties.
Figure 2:
Comparison of uncertainties of binned distance moduli between
∼
3000
\sim 3000
simulated volume-limited
z
<
0.3
z<0.3
LSST supernovae with (green) and without (orange) DESI follow-up, and Union3 (blue). We plot the square roots of the diagonal elements of the distance modulus covariance matrix, and
σ
corr
\sigma_{\rm corr}
correspond to the first off-diagonal. Without spectroscopic follow-up, the new statistical power of LSST SNe can hardly be utilized as systematics approach values comparable to Union3. The photo-
z
z
-induced uncertainties are estimated based on a systematic
σ
z
=
0.005
\sigma_{z}=0.005
.
Rubin’s photometrically classified samples will be contaminated with non-Ia supernovae, which are generally fainter.
Thus, live spectroscopic follow-up is necessary to classify transients with certainty. Indeed, simulations show that photometric mis-classification alone systematically shifts the resulting cosmology
(Mitra
et al.
,
2025
; Malz
et al.
,
2025
)
, an effect that could soon become the limiting factor:
Vincenzi
et al.
(
2023
)
find a bias of order 0.1 in
w
a
w_{a}
from mis-classification alone — half a standard deviation or more with the soon-expected increase in precision.
1
1
1
With BAO data from DESI DR2, the total uncertainty on
w
a
w_{a}
already drops below 0.3
(Abdul Karim
et al.
,
2025
)
.
Likewise, because Rubin only provides photometry measurements, SN redshifts will need to be estimated photometrically from the SN and its host galaxy. At low redshift (
z
<
0.5
z<0.5
), errors propagate
2
2
2
At higher redshifts
z
>
0.5
z>0.5
, (anti-)correlations between the photometric redshift and light curve parameters partially compensate for inaccurate photo-
z
z
measurements
(Mitra
et al.
,
2023
; Kessler
et al.
,
2025
)
. In this case, the final impact on
σ
μ
\sigma_{\mu}
is thus smaller than expected by uncorrelated error propagation. This effect does not occur at low redshifts
z
<
0.5
z<0.5
, precisely where
σ
μ
phot
\sigma_{\mu}^{\rm phot}
quickly grows with
1
/
z
1/z
.
to the measured distance moduli as
σ
μ
phot
=
d
​
μ
d
​
z
​
σ
z
≈
5
ln
⁡
10
​
σ
z
z
.
\displaystyle\sigma_{\mu}^{\rm phot}=\frac{d\mu}{dz}\,\sigma_{z}\approx\frac{5}{\ln 10}\,\frac{\sigma_{z}}{z}.
(4)
Even with a rather optimistic systematic
σ
z
phot
=
0.005
\sigma_{z}^{\rm phot}=0.005
(The LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration
et al.
,
2018
)
, the measured distance moduli at
z
=
0.1
z=0.1
may be systematically off by
σ
μ
phot
>
0.1
mag
\sigma_{\mu}^{\rm phot}>$0.1\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}$
, single-handedly exceeding the entire systematics budget of Union3 (
Figure
2
). Additionally, a small fraction of photometric host redshifts will be catastrophic outliers
(Schmidt
et al.
,
2020
)
. In comparison, spectroscopic redshifts from the host galaxy are accurate to
σ
z
spec
≈
10
−
5
\sigma_{z}^{\rm spec}\approx 10^{-5}
(Lan
et al.
,
2023
)
.
Even for the small subset of host galaxies with a previously-known spectroscopic redshift, a live supernova redshift helps to correctly match the SN to its host.
3
3
3
Host galaxy redshifts are more accurate since galaxy emission lines are narrow compared to supernova absorption lines, which are blueshifted to varying degrees by the expanding ejecta. Galaxy emission lines are often visible in live supernova spectra, so live follow-up can eliminate the need for a dedicated host galaxy measurement. For example spectra, see
Hall
et al.
(
2026
)
.
Otherwise, incorrect host associations in photometry-only surveys lead to redshift misassignments that bias the inferred dark energy equation of state
(Qu
et al.
,
2024
; Mitra
et al.
,
2025
)
.
When combining all the above effects,
Mitra
et al.
(
2025
)
forecast that in photometry-only Rubin analyses, the aggregate biases on
w
0
w_{0}
and
w
a
w_{a}
will each exceed a full standard deviation at the precision required to reach
5
​
σ
5\sigma
from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM.
In short, photometry-only analyses are systematically vulnerable on both dimensions of the Hubble diagram: redshift errors on the
x
x
-axis and mis-classification biases on the
y
y
-axis. Live spectroscopy directly resolves both weaknesses, and would thus significantly strengthen a potential
5
​
σ
5\sigma
discovery claim.
I.4
Cross-survey synergies and a window of opportunity for DESI
The current largest-scale plan to follow up Rubin transients is the Time Domain Extragalactic Survey (TiDES,
Frohmaier
et al.
2025
) of the 4-metre Multi-Object Spectroscopic Telescope (4MOST,
de Jong
et al.
2019
). Over five years, it will provide around 10 000 spectra of SNe Ia, and over 100 000 accurate host galaxy redshifts. Yet, this program is not optimized for supernova cosmology: Telescope pointings are scheduled without consideration of live transients, so they are only observed if they happen to fall into a pre-planned pointing. SNe Ia can thus not be observed near peak brightness consistently. Fixed exposure times that do not scale according to observing conditions also lead to inconsistent depths. Both effects exacerbate spectroscopic Malmquist bias, where intrinsically brighter SNe are more likely to pass signal-to-noise cuts, and are thus preferentially classified.
Frohmaier
et al.
(
2025
)
show that this effect occurs for
z
>
0.15
z>0.15
for TiDES.
Recent work has called for greater coordination among dark energy experiments in general
(Leauthaud and Riess,
2025
)
. Efforts to identify survey synergies for supernova cosmology have been explored for other instrument combinations
(Rose
et al.
,
2021
)
, but not for DESI and Rubin specifically. DESI
(DESI Collaboration
et al.
,
2016
)
is currently the most powerful ground-based multi-fiber spectrograph, capable of taking up to 5000 spectra in a single exposure, making it a prime candidate for a systematic follow-up program of Rubin transients. Furthermore, DESI achieves consistent depths by scaling an effective exposure time to real observing conditions
(Schlafly
et al.
,
2023
)
. This dynamic exposure strategy mitigates spectroscopic Malmquist bias and thus makes DESI uniquely capable of building the rigorous, volume-limited subsample required for precision cosmology.
Coordinating these two experiments would make better use of available resources to extract more information from SNe — ideally through a little-to-no-cost integration into DESI’s existing survey — and thereby contribute towards their shared main science goal of measuring dark energy.
A critical window of opportunity exists in 2027, when DESI overlaps with Year 2 of Rubin, which is when the rolling cadence begins in Rubin’s Wide Fast Deep (WFD) survey, producing well-sampled SN light curves. At the same time, DESI already began extending its sky coverage into the southern hemisphere where Rubin operates. If the Rubin WFD starts rolling by April 2027, the overlap lasts for 1.75 years: In December 2028, the presently-funded phase of DESI will end, making timely coordination essential for maximizing scientific return.
I.5
Paper outline
The outline of the paper is as follows:
Section
II
employs a toy model to demonstrate that in the current data landscape, the greatest leverage on dynamical dark energy comes from new SNe Ia at redshifts below
z
≈
0.6
z\approx 0.6
. Section
III
describes our emulation of Rubin’s Wide Fast Deep (WFD) and details our simulation framework as well as the treatment of systematic uncertainties. Section
IV
presents the design of our DESI spectroscopic follow-up program, including simulations for the expected depths for standard exposures, scheduling, and expected yields. Section
V
reports our cosmological forecasts and explores the impact of systematics. Section
VI
discusses possible future directions. We conclude in Section
VII
.
II
Not all redshifts are created equal: where new supernovae help most
Figure 3:
We sample different cosmologies according to the current (DESI DR2+Planck+Union3) best-fitting probability distributions for
w
0
,
w
a
,
Ω
m
w_{0},w_{a},\Omega_{m}
, compute the theoretical distance moduli and compare them against the best-fit cosmology (black dashed line). On the left panel, we can see how measuring additional SNe Ia at redshifts
z
≈
0.55
z\approx 0.55
would currently be the most helpful for constraining dynamical dark energy. On the right panel, residuals are anchored at
z
=
0.3
z=0.3
, for example, by an additional high-precision measurement. Now, low-
z
z
SNe become the next best place to measure. So these plots highlight not only that there is an optimal redshift to measure at, but that a stronger medium-redshift anchor is required to make additional low-redshift supernovae more informative.
Figure 4:
Distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM given by the number of standard deviations, and Figure of Merit when adding supernovae at one redshift bin
z
z
with different total uncertainties to DESI DR2+Planck+Union3 and low-
z
z
SNe. Total uncertainties include statistical and systematic errors, although statistical errors typically become subdominant for
10
3
10^{3}
to
10
4
10^{4}
SNe Ia. We find that measuring around
z
≈
0.6
z\approx 0.6
increases the distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM and the Figure of Merit most.
Figure 5:
Distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM and Figure of Merit when adding supernovae at two redshift bins (
z
1
z_{1}
and
z
2
z_{2}
) with
10
​
m
​
m
​
a
​
g
10\rm mmag
total uncertainty each to DESI DR2+Planck+Union3 and low-
z
z
SNe. Two measurements at medium redshifts
z
≈
0.6
z\approx 0.6
and the combination of low-
z
z
and medium-
z
z
are considered optimal.
The constraining power of new supernovae on dark energy depends on their redshifts. Intuitively, one might think that high-redshift supernovae are the most beneficial: The luminosity distance is an integral over redshift, so going to higher redshifts would seem to include a larger chunk of the expansion history.
But when comparing distance moduli from different
w
0
​
w
a
​
CDM
w_{0}w_{a}\rm CDM
cosmologies drawn from current best-fit probabilities (
Figure
3
), we similarly find the biggest variation at medium redshifts —
z
≈
0.55
z\approx 0.55
, implying that the SNe necessary for testing
Λ
\Lambda
CDM versus
w
0
​
w
a
​
CDM
w_{0}w_{a}\rm CDM
are well within Rubin and DESI capabilities.
We briefly investigate the following: Given the current data from BAO, CMB and SNe, which redshifts should one ideally target with a new supernova survey intended to test constant versus dynamical dark energy? Which redshifts reduce the size of the
w
0
−
w
a
w_{0}-w_{a}
error ellipse — quantified by the Dark Energy Task Force Figure of Merit (DETF FoM,
Albrecht
et al.
2006
, and Appendix
A
) — the most, or, alternatively, offer the largest increase in the distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM?
II.1
Toy model
In our toy model, we explore the addition of supernova measurements concentrated into a single redshift.
4
4
4
This naturally leads to a smaller constraining power compared to multiple bins that can “pinch” the Hubble diagram at multiple redshifts.
We assume that this binned measurement has a combined baseline uncertainty of
10
mmag
10\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
. This allows for a conservative accounting of statistical and systematic uncertainties. For example, the statistical uncertainty would be
5
mmag
5\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
for 1000 SNe with an unexplained dispersion of
0.15
mag
0.15\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
. Modern calibration of filter zero-points traces back to the CALSPEC system of fundamental white dwarf stars
(Bohlin
et al.
,
2014
)
. This is typically accurate up to
5
mmag
5\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
(Union3,
Rubin
et al.
2025a
) or less (DES-Dovekie,
Popovic
et al.
2025a
). And the simulated covariances in
Rubin
et al.
(
2025b
)
reach values below
10
mmag
10\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
consistently out to
z
≈
1.5
z\approx 1.5
, even with comprehensive Union3-like systematics.
We compute the corresponding Fisher matrix
(Fisher,
1922
)
F
a
​
b
SN
=
∑
i
,
j
∂
μ
​
(
z
i
)
∂
p
a
|
fid
​
𝒞
−
1
​
(
z
i
,
z
j
)
​
∂
μ
​
(
z
j
)
∂
p
b
|
fid
\displaystyle F_{ab}^{\rm SN}=\sum_{i,j}\frac{\partial\mu(z_{i})}{\partial p_{a}}\Bigr|_{\rm fid}\,\mathcal{C}^{-1}(z_{i},z_{j})\,\frac{\partial\mu(z_{j})}{\partial p_{b}}\Bigr|_{\rm fid}
(5)
where
𝒑
=
{
w
0
,
w
a
,
Ω
M
,
ℳ
}
\bm{p}=\{w_{0},w_{a},\Omega_{M},\mathcal{M}\}
are the cosmological parameters,
𝒞
\mathcal{C}
is the distance modulus covariance matrix (
1
×
1
1\times 1
for a single binned measurement) with units
mag
2
\rm mag^{2}
, and add that to current data as described in the following.
II.2
Baseline data and choice of fiducial cosmology
The baseline dataset assumed throughout this paper is a combination of BAO, CMB and SNe. For the supernovae, we use the Union3 dataset
(Rubin
et al.
,
2025a
)
, as its systematics treatment is most similar to the simulation we will use in this paper. We also include a low-
z
z
supernova sample, for example from nearby supernova surveys such as ZTF
(Bellm
et al.
,
2019
; Ginolin
et al.
,
2025
)
, LS4
(Miller
et al.
,
2025
)
, or a potential Rubin short-exposure micro survey (§
VI
).
We calculate a Fisher matrix using the parameter covariance matrices from DESI DR2
(Abdul Karim
et al.
,
2025
)
5
5
5
https://data.desi.lbl.gov/public/papers/y3/bao-cosmo-params/cobaya/base_w_wa/
, and add to that a Fisher matrix (
Equation
A4
) from a
10
mmag
10\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
measurement uncertainty at
z
=
0.05
z=0.05
as a conservative estimate of a low-
z
z
SN sample. We err on the conservative side deliberately so that our results do not presuppose a perfectly calibrated low-redshift sample. A well-calibrated sample — especially if on the same photometric system as the
z
>
0.1
z>0.1
Rubin data — would have more cosmological impact than this single binned
10
mmag
10\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
measurement. Some technical details of the Fisher matrix calculations are explained in Appendix
A
.
Typically, surveys evaluate their dynamical dark energy constraining power by computing the Figure of Merit at a fiducial
Λ
\Lambda
CDM cosmology (
w
0
=
−
1
,
w
a
=
0
w_{0}=-1,w_{a}=0
). But since we are interested in probing the hints of a potentially time-evolving dark energy
(Rubin
et al.
,
2025a
; DES Collaboration
et al.
,
2024
; Abdul Karim
et al.
,
2025
)
, we evaluate the FoM at the DESI+CMB+Union3 best-fit values of
w
0
=
−
0.667
,
w
a
=
−
1.09
,
Ω
m
=
0.327
w_{0}=-0.667,w_{a}=-1.09,\Omega_{m}=0.327
(Abdul Karim
et al.
,
2025
)
.
6
6
6
This leads to typically
10
%
10\%
lower FoM values than when evaluated at
Λ
\Lambda
CDM for the same distance modulus covariances
(Rubin
et al.
,
2025b
)
.
And now we can probe the discovery potential of dynamical dark energy directly by using the projected distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM as an additional metric.
The current baseline values for DESI+CMB+Union3 and low-
z
z
SNe are
FoM
=
108
\rm{FoM}=108
and
3.8
​
σ
3.8\sigma
from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM. These values are within 1% with or without the addition of new low-
z
z
SNe, highlighting the fact that new mid-
z
z
SNe are required to make a low-
z
z
sample cosmologically useful (
Figure
3
).
II.3
Results
We plot the resulting FoM values and distances from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM as a function of redshift at which a single measurement is added in
Figure
4
. Adding SNe at redshifts 0.5 to 0.6 leads to the largest gains in FoM and
Λ
\Lambda
CDM-distance. Furthermore, observing costs increase sharply towards higher redshifts.
7
7
7
To maintain a constant signal-to-noise ratio for faint supernovae, where noise is dominated by the background, the required exposure time
t
t
scales roughly as
t
∝
d
L
4
t\propto d_{L}^{4}
.
Thus, an optimized, cost-conscious survey must have a lower “optimal” redshift.
The “optimal” redshift can be understood as the interplay of two effects: Above
z
≈
0.3
z\approx 0.3
, the universe becomes matter-dominated, so dark energy dynamics impact observables such as supernova luminosity distances less. However, when constraining a potentially time-evolving dark energy, it is desirable to go back in time far enough to establish a long lever arm on the Hubble diagram. This naturally pushes the maximally informative redshift out to
z
≈
0.6
z\approx 0.6
, irrespective of how the dark energy equation of state is parametrized.
8
8
8
Additionally,
Lodha
et al.
(
2025
)
points out that the CPL parametrization
(
w
0
,
w
a
)
(w_{0},w_{a})
is flexible enough to explain DESI BAO results, and that the preference for evolving dark energy is not driven by this parametrization.
This is consistent with
Spergel and Starkman (
2002
)
, who found similar optimal redshifts for dark energy with a constant equation of state
w
w
.
We also plot the FoM values and
Λ
\Lambda
CDM-distances as a function of two redshifts, each containing an independent measurement, in
Figure
5
. The results are mostly the same — going to high redshifts is not better when optimizing for FoM, and is even disfavored when optimizing for distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM. Redshifts around
z
≈
0.6
z\approx 0.6
are preferred. And an additional optimal combination arises: adding more low-redshift supernovae at
z
=
0.05
z=0.05
, combined with supernovae at medium redshifts
z
≈
0.6
z\approx 0.6
, is also optimal. Thus, there is merit in having multiple high-quality low-
z
z
supernova samples, as these are especially powerful at constraining late-time dark energy
w
0
w_{0}
.
When adding a third independent measurement, no other optimal redshift combination emerges.
The key takeaway is that new high-precision low- to medium-redshift (
z
<
0.6
z<0.6
) supernovae are both necessary and sufficient for testing
Λ
\Lambda
CDM versus dynamical dark energy at a
5
​
σ
5\sigma
level if the best-fit values do not change significantly. They will provide the most constraining power and are cost-effective to spectroscopically follow up.
III
Rubin light curve simulation
Rubin/LSST’s Wide Fast Deep (WFD) will use 80% of Rubin’s total time, surveying almost half the sky (
19 600
deg
2
19\,600\text{\,}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{e}\mathrm{g}^{2}
). The first year will cover the sky uniformly. Since the same patch of the sky won’t be revisited very often, these supernova light curves will be too sparsely sampled for reliable light-curve fitting. This is one of the main reasons a rolling cadence was suggested
(LSST Science Collaboration
et al.
,
2017
; Lochner
et al.
,
2018
,
2022
)
.
Leistedt
et al.
(
2025
)
then proposed and implemented a uniform rolling cadence, combining the benefits of rolling with uniformity being reached at key milestones.
The rolling cadence will start in Rubin’s second year (2027), coinciding with the extension of DESI. LSST observations are taken in pairs of filters
u
,
g
,
r
,
i
,
z
,
Y
u,g,r,i,z,Y
, with
30
s
30\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
exposures, and the “high-activity” regions receive revisits in a different pair every three days on average
9
9
9
See
https://survey-strategy.lsst.io/baseline/wfd.html
for observing statistics.
. High and low activity regions alternate sky locations per season (yearly), covering roughly half of the WFD each. Here, we only simulate the high-activity WFD as it is more worthwhile to spectroscopically follow up SNe that are expected to have well-sampled light curves.
III.1
Filters, cadences, exposure times
Figure 6:
Simulated light curve for a median Type Ia supernova at
z
=
0.225
z=0.225
, reflecting the (high-activity) WFD strategy to observe in pairs of filters every three days. These results are similar to other simulations, e.g. fig. 16 of
(Kessler
et al.
,
2019
)
. Missing points reflect bright moon phases (affecting
g
,
r
,
i
g,r,i
predominantly), the possibility of a supernova being missed due to chip gaps, and
u
u
and
Y
Y
bands being excluded in our cosmology analysis. The numbers in the legend are the quadrature-summed signal-to-noise values per filter.
We emulate the high-activity WFD by assuming observations in the following filters, three days apart, and on a 28-day (lunar) cycle:
g
+
r
,
i
,
g
+
r
,
z
,
g
+
i
,
z
,
r
,
z
,
z
g+r,i,g+r,z,g+i,z,r,z,z
. Every observation has
30
s
30\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
exposures. For the time being, we do not include
u
u
-band because light curve models like SALT
(Guy
et al.
,
2007
; Kenworthy
et al.
,
2021
)
) do not model this band well
(Nordin
et al.
,
2018
)
, or
Y
Y
-band because the high sky brightness results in low signal-to-noise ratios.
In total, this amounts to two observations in
i
i
, three observations in
g
,
r
g,r
, and four observations in
z
z
per lunar cycle. These cadences incorporate the effect of the Moon: Bright moon phases will have an impact on observations. Due to Rayleigh scattering, bluer light is predominantly scattered in the sky, heavily increasing the noise especially in
g
,
r
,
i
g,r,i
. Thus, there is a window each lunar cycle in which only
z
z
-band information enters our analysis.
We randomly dropped one additional observation in
i
i
per lunar cycle to simulate possible light curve gaps if the supernova happens to fall into a chip gap. The omission of 1 in 13 observations is based on the fill factor of 93%
(LSST Science Collaboration
et al.
,
2009
)
, and the
i
i
band was chosen arbitrarily.
We found that changing the specific sets of observations has minimal impact on cosmological constraints, especially when only taking into account the relatively low-redshift supernovae that we aim to spectroscopically follow up. Because the high-activity WFD achieves high total signal-to-noise ratios for these nearby targets anyway, more densely sampled light curves improve constraints only marginally; cycling through
g
,
r
,
i
,
z
g,r,i,z
every four days (while still omitting
g
,
r
,
i
g,r,i
during bright moon) improves FoM values by less than 1%. Consequently, occasional data losses due to weather also have little impact.
We assume depths where a photometric
SNR
>
5
\rm SNR>5
(“
5
​
σ
5\sigma
depths”) is achieved for
g
=
24.50
g=24.50
,
r
=
24.03
r=24.03
,
i
=
23.41
i=23.41
, and
z
=
22.74
z=22.74
for a nominal
30
s
30\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
WFD exposure. These numbers
10
10
10
https://pstn-054.lsst.io/
take into account real observing conditions, such as a simulated median
r
r
-band seeing of
1.05
″
1.05\text{\,}\arcsec
, and are thus much worse than the higher numbers of
25.0
,
24.7
,
24.0
,
23.3
25.0,24.7,24.0,23.3
listed on the overview website,
11
11
11
https://rubinobservatory.org/for-scientists/rubin-101/key-numbers
which correspond to idealized observing conditions (e.g.
r
r
-band seeing of
0.70
″
0.70\text{\,}\arcsec
).
III.2
Light curve and cosmology simulation
We use the simulation code
12
12
12
https://github.com/rubind/wfirst-sim
, used only with modest changes, adding features for ground-based surveys.
from
Rubin
et al.
(
2025b
)
to simulate a set of supernova light curves for given survey specifications and perform the cosmology fit.
Rubin
et al.
(
2025b
)
implement a Fisher matrix code which emulates a UNITY-like treatment of systematics
(Rubin
et al.
,
2025a
)
. We fit for distance moduli and nuisance parameters simultaneously – at the level of individual light curve points. This takes into account all correlations between these parameters, and fully propagates their uncertainties to the distance modulus covariance matrix.
From there, we obtain a Fisher matrix (
Equation
A4
) and can thus evaluate the performance of the simulated surveys. Here, we give a brief overview of the assumed uncertainties. We refer the reader to
Rubin
et al.
(
2025b
)
and Appendix
B
for more details.
Supernovae are generated for a given survey footprint based on volumetric rates from
Rodney
et al.
(
2014
)
. Individual light curves are generated with SALT3
(Kenworthy
et al.
,
2021
)
with a population fit to
(Betoule
et al.
,
2014
)
. Noise is added based on the previously cited
5
​
σ
5\sigma
depths.
III.2.1
SN-to-SN variability
Through light curve fits
(Guy
et al.
,
2007
; Kenworthy
et al.
,
2021
)
, SNe Ia can be standardized with a root-mean-square accuracy of
0.145
mag
0.145\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
(Rigault
et al.
,
2025
)
. We split this into a “gray” dispersion of
0.1
mag
0.1\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
and a “color” dispersion of
0.03
mag
0.03\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
(Pierel
et al.
,
2022
)
. With a color standardization parameter of
β
≈
3.5
\beta\approx 3.5
(Rubin
et al.
,
2025a
)
, these two dispersions combine back to the familiar
0.1
2
+
(
0.03
⋅
3.5
)
2
​
mag
=
0.145
​
mag
\sqrt{0.1^{2}+(0.03\cdot 3.5)^{2}}\,$\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}$=0.145\,$\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}$
. Gray dispersions is applied as a correlated/systematic. The color dispersion is correlated per filter per supernova.
The above numbers may be conservative: Lower dispersion values are achievable with improved photometric calibration of optical (
Rubin
et al.
(
2025a
)
, Fig. 6) or with the addition of near-infrared data
(Pierel
et al.
,
2022
)
13
13
13
We included a two-week Roman-like survey as placeholder data to calibrate the SALT3-NIR model from
Pierel
et al.
(
2022
)
. No near-infrared data is assumed for Rubin SNe.
. We explore the impact of the chosen gray dispersion on cosmology in
Figure
19
, while also showing that our main results are robust to larger values.
Host galaxy dust extinction lowers the signal-to-noise ratio, correlated per supernova (similar to the gray dispersion). For this, we use the
Cardelli
et al.
(
1989
)
color law with a standard
R
V
=
3.1
R_{V}=3.1
.
III.2.2
Calibration and supernova model
We assume the following Gaussian prior uncertainties on instrument calibration uncertainties:
•
5
mmag
5\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
zero-point calibration uncertainty per filter, correlated across all SNe.
•
5
Å
5\text{\,}\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}
wavelength uncertainty per filter, correlated across all SNe.
•
7
mmag
/
µ
​
m
7\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}\mathrm{/}\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolMicro}\mathrm{m}
tilt in flux calibration vs. wavelength
(Bohlin
et al.
,
2014
)
, correlated across all SNe
Uncertainties in the trained supernova model are also taken into account. This is an important step, as ignoring model uncertainties leads to overly optimistic cosmology forecasts (see
Rubin
et al.
2025b
and Appendix
B
).
The Bayesian fit typically finds posterior calibration uncertainties smaller than their priors. This is known as self-calibration
(Kim and Miquel,
2006
)
: The behavior of an average SNe Ia is assumed consistent across different redshifts. That is, a higher-redshift supernova should behave similarly in a redder filter when compared to a lower-redshift supernova in a bluer filter. If the calibration of one filter is off, the model that best fits all supernovae simultaneously will detect that inconsistency — and adjust the calibration parameters accordingly.
In contrast, frequentist analyses
(Brout
et al.
,
2022
; Popovic
et al.
,
2025b
)
self-calibrate to a much smaller extent due to the lack of the simultaneous analysis of all light curves: Calibration parameters are uncorrelated by construction, and the final covariance relies entirely on the assumed “prior” uncertainties.
Figure 7:
Histogram of forecasted SNe Ia discovered in our simulations of Rubin’s high-activity Wide Fast Deep in the overlap region with DESI in one year. Practically all SNe are well-measured up to
z
=
0.35
z=0.35
. The SNR values given here are defined to be the quadrature sum of all measurements of a single supernova.
III.3
Redshift completeness
Redshift completeness refers to the ability of a survey to capture the true population of supernovae up to a certain redshift. Given the magnitude limits of Rubin, we want to estimate below which redshift the sample is redshift-complete, i.e., few intrinsically fainter SNe are lost (Malmquist bias,
Malmquist (
1925
)
).
In the redshift bin
z
=
0.3
​
…
​
0.35
z=0.3...0.35
, over
99.7
%
99.7\%
of SNe have a combined signal-to-noise ratio of over 40 (
Figure
7
), and are thus considered well-measured by the simulation. It is thus highly improbable that the Rubin WFD loses intrinsically fainter normal SNe below
z
WFD
=
0.35
z_{\rm WFD}=0.35
.
Because Rubin provides an essentially complete and unbiased parent catalog up to this redshift, the limiting factor for our final volume-limited cosmology sample is dictated entirely by our follow-up capabilities. We thus investigate this spectroscopic completeness, i.e., the ability of DESI to observe this complete sample, separately in §
IV
.
IV
DESI spectroscopic follow-up
Figure 8:
DESI, DESI-II and approximated LSST Wide Fast Deep footprints. The numbers in the legend refer to the areas inside DESI(-II) and LSST-WFD that are observable by both sites in a single night. The total footprint overlaps with LSST-WFD are
9000
deg
2
9000\text{\,}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{e}\mathrm{g}^{2}
for DESI and
5000
deg
2
5000\text{\,}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{e}\mathrm{g}^{2}
for DESI-II.
Figure 9:
The nightly observable area of DESI and DESI-II footprints within LSST-WFD in 2027, requiring object altitude
>
30
∘
>30^{\circ}
and Sun altitude
<
−
15
∘
<-15^{\circ}
at both sites.
The Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument uses its multi-fiber spectrograph to observe up to 5000 spectra per pointing, in a range from 3600 to
9800
Å
9800\text{\,}\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}
(DESI Collaboration
et al.
,
2016
; Poppett
et al.
,
2024
)
. DESI has had its initial survey extended to cover a footprint of at least
17 000
deg
2
17\,000\text{\,}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{e}\mathrm{g}^{2}
by the end of 2028.
DESI uses the 4-meter Mayall telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory (northern hemisphere), while Rubin is on Cerro Pachon in Chile (southern hemisphere). Naturally, there will be limited overlap in survey footprints. But having covered the northern sky, the extension of DESI specifically focuses on tiles further to the south, increasing the overlap region with Rubin’s WFD (see
Figure
8
).
Ideally, one would like to spectroscopically follow up all supernovae discovered by Rubin. But devoting a chunk of DESI’s time fully to supernovae would be a suboptimal use of the instrument. No more than a few supernovae would be measured per pointing (DESI’s FoV is
8
deg
2
8\text{\,}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{e}\mathrm{g}^{2}
), while the instrument has 5000 fibers. Thus, an efficient DESI supernova program should be embedded into the main survey, only borrowing a couple of the free fibers whenever the opportunity arises.
DESI’s main survey consists of a “dark” and “bright” program (see
Schlafly
et al.
(
2023
)
for survey operations). Dark tiles are observed during dark time, and the “bright” program is observed when conditions are worse due to the impact of sky brightness, seeing and atmospheric transparency. Dark and bright tiles receive effective exposures time of (
t
eff
=
1000
s
t_{\rm eff}=$1000\text{\,}\mathrm{s}$
) and (
t
eff
=
180
s
t_{\rm eff}=$180\text{\,}\mathrm{s}$
) respectively (or
16.7
min
16.7\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
and
3
min
3\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{i}\mathrm{n}
), so the dark tiles are intended to observe much deeper than the bright tiles. Effective exposure time refers to an observation under nominal dark conditions (
1.1
″
1.1\text{\,}\arcsec
seeing in r-band, r-band sky brightness of 21.07 AB mag, no clouds, and pointing at zenith). When observing, DESI takes the actual conditions into account in real-time, and calculates the necessary “wall-clock” time such that each pointing receives a similar depth. Because the Moon can impact SNRs heavily, the wall-clock time per exposure is often similar for dark and bright tiles.
We assume that the main program is allotted 670 hours of dark time and 110 hours of bright time per year (
Schlafly
et al.
(
2023
)
and D. Schlegel, priv. comm.). Each location on the sky receives an average of 5 visits over multiple tiles, leading to a uniform coverage of the whole survey area.
The current DESI Transients Survey program
(Hall
et al.
,
2026
)
operates with what we call a “passive trigger”: DESI proceeds with pre-planned pointings, and SNe only trigger the usage of spare fibers within a planned pointing, i.e., they are only observed if they happen to fall into a pre-planned pointing, leaving no control over when the follow-up is scheduled.
Instead, we suggest that as long as a DESI tile still has remaining visits left, Rubin-discovered transients may trigger one of these visits. We call this an “active trigger”, and aim to take spectra near peak brightness. Active triggers dynamically reorder the queue, allowing many more live supernovae to be followed up near peak brightness – and at little-to-no additional cost to DESI’s main program.
In this section, we evaluate the performance of such a one-year integrated DESI supernova spectroscopy program during Rubin’s year 2, when the WFD rolling cadence commences: How good is DESI at spectroscopically following up live SNe, obtaining redshift measurements, and classifying them?
IV.1
Depths at nominal effective exposure times
To begin, we estimate the maximum redshifts at which one can reliably distinguish SNe Ia from other transients with one nominal dark (
t
eff
=
1000
s
t_{\rm eff}=$1000\text{\,}\mathrm{s}$
) or bright (
t
eff
=
180
s
t_{\rm eff}=$180\text{\,}\mathrm{s}$
) exposure. We call the redshifts to which we can obtain a volume-limited spectroscopic sample
z
VL
dark
z_{\rm VL}^{\rm dark}
and
z
VL
bright
z_{\rm VL}^{\rm bright}
respectively.
In general, it is preferable to observe a supernova near peak, because the signal is stronger and spectral features are more distinct
(Branch
et al.
,
2006
)
. When simulating the observation scheduling, we require the candidate to be
±
5
\pm 5
days within peak. This is chosen based on our tests showing SNR drops off no more than 10% when observing at
±
5
\pm 5
days from maximum (in the observer frame) relative to peak brightness for redshifts around 0.3.
One must avoid spectroscopic selection effects, since it is much easier to spectroscopically classify intrinsically brighter supernovae. When determining the highest “classifiable redshift”, we thus require that supernovae intrinsically fainter by
Δ
​
M
=
1.0
mag
\Delta M=$1.0\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}$
be classifiable. This covers
>
99.9
%
>99.9\%
of SNe in populations similar to
Betoule
et al.
(
2014
)
, meaning that we would indeed obtain a redshift-complete spectroscopic sample representative of the underlying population.
14
14
14
This drops to
99.5
%
99.5\%
when using the standardization parameters from
Rubin
et al.
(
2026
)
.
To determine whether a SN Ia is classifiable, we use visual inspection of the characteristic SiII
λ
​
6335
\lambda 6335
feature as an initial check. This feature is Dopper shifted by the photospheric expansion to
6150
Å
6150\text{\,}\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}
in the supernova’s rest frame
(Filippenko,
1997
)
. Rubin’s photometric redshifts allow us to know which wavelengths we should examine for this and other spectral features. This SiII feature is within the wavelength range of DESI up to
z
∼
0.6
z\sim 0.6
.
We also compute the signal-to-noise ratio per
15
Å
15\text{\,}\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}
from 4500-8000
Å
\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}
(hereafter denoted
SNR
15
​
Å
\rm SNR_{15$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}$}
) to compare to values in
Frohmaier
et al.
(
2025
)
(TiDES). They found that a minimum
SNR
15
​
Å
\rm SNR_{15$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}$}
in the range of 3 to 5 is sufficient to reliably classify supernovae, including sub-types, even without a redshift prior.
IV.1.1
Generating noisy spectra
Figure 10:
A faint Type Ia supernova spectrum at maximum light (bold colored lines), with added noise (thin colored lines) as simulated by DESI’s
SpecSim
for a single dark exposure. Binned in
15
Å
15\text{\,}\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}
.
SNR
15
​
Å
=
3.0
\rm SNR_{15$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}$}=3.0
, total
SNR
=
52
\rm SNR=52
.
Figure 11:
The same simulated SN Ia spectrum as in Figure
10
. Even without the visual cue from the template, the SiII absorption line is still readily visible.
To simulate realistic spectra, we use DESI’s
SpecSim
15
15
15
https://github.com/desihub/specsim
and feed into it a SN Ia with average intrinsic properties as generated by the Probabilistic Autoencoder (PAE) from
Stein
et al.
(
2022
)
, which was trained on spectral time series from the Nearby Supernova Factory
(Aldering
et al.
,
2002
)
with a rest frame wavelength range from 3300 to 8600
Å
\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}
. The PAE is constructed such that setting all input parameters to 0 generates spectral time series of an average supernova. In order to test behavior away from maximum light, we generate a total of 32 spectra, one day each from
−
10
-10
to
+
21
+21
days in the supernova’s rest frame.
Then,
SpecSim
generates noise at the level of number of electrons
16
16
16
https://specsim.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/specsim.simulator.Simulator.html#specsim.simulator.Simulator.generate_random_noise
, including Poisson noise from the source (SN), sky, dark and Gaussian read noise, before propagating that to noise flux in the measured signal. We use standard settings, including an airmass of 1 and no additional noising due to suboptimal observing conditions, so that the input exposure times are indeed equivalent to the effective exposure times.
To simulate a faint supernova, we for now, and for the sole purpose of estimating
S
​
N
​
R
15
​
Å
SNR_{15\AA }
near the SiII 6150Åfeature, simply employ a gray (wavelength-independent) offset of the aforementioned
Δ
​
M
=
1.0
mag
\Delta M=$1.0\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}$
, which dampens the flux by 60%. The gray offset leaves open the question whether such a faint supernova is intrinsically faint, or appears faint due to dust extinction. If the latter is the case, for the same
Δ
​
M
\Delta M
, bluer wavelengths would be affected more strongly than wavelengths around the critical SiII line. So such a gray offset is a conservative estimate.
17
17
17
We explicitly compare synthetic photometry to an
SNCosmo
-generated unstandardized light curve of a SN with parameters
(
x
1
,
c
)
=
(
−
2
,
0.2
)
(x_{1},c)=(-2,0.2)
, which is
∼
1
mag
\sim$1\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}$
fainter in
m
B
m_{B}
, and find that the gray offset imposed here is conservative by
∼
0.1
mag
\sim$0.1\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}$
in
r
r
-band, and
∼
0.2
mag
\sim$0.2\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}$
in
i
i
-band, which is where the SiII line will be redshifted.
IV.1.2
Results and discussion
We find that with a single DESI dark time effective exposure of
1000
s
1000\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
, one can reliably classify (99.9% complete) SN Ia populations up to
z
VL
dark
=
0.3
z_{\rm VL}^{\rm dark}=0.3
via the SiII
λ
​
6335
\lambda 6335
feature alone. An example spectrum of a faint SN Ia (
Δ
​
M
=
1.0
mag
\Delta M=$1.0\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}$
) at
z
=
0.3
z=0.3
is given in
Figure
10
, with a zoom-in on the SiII feature in
Figure
11
. That spectrum has a corresponding
SNR
15
​
Å
=
3.0
\rm SNR_{15$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}$}=3.0
. In comparison, an average-brightness supernova (
Δ
​
M
=
0.0
mag
\Delta M=$0.0\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}$
) has
SNR
15
​
Å
=
7.2
\rm SNR_{15$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}$}=7.2
.
Observing the same faint
z
=
0.3
z=0.3
supernova with one dark exposure at
+
5
+5
or
−
5
-5
days (observer frame) from maximum light leads to a drop to
SNR
15
​
Å
=
2.7
\rm SNR_{15$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}$}=2.7
, with the SiII feature still visible.
18
18
18
This is important to verify, even though practically, an edge case like this will rarely come into play: One will always schedule around the faintest supernova, trying to capture it at maximum light. So the only scenario where this happens is when multiple faint SNe close to
z
=
0.3
z=0.3
with different peak times happen to be in the same tile at the edges of one 10-day observation window. And in this rare case, it might be preferable to simply schedule two separate pointings. Coincidentally, SNe at higher redshifts are also more forgiving in this regard – they stay near peak for longer in the observer frame by the
1
+
z
1+z
time dilation factor.
Going to
z
=
0.35
z=0.35
leads to a significant reduction in the SNR as anticipated, with
SNR
15
​
Å
=
2.1
\rm SNR_{15$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}$}=2.1
for a faint SN Ia (
Δ
​
M
=
1.0
mag
\Delta M=$1.0\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}$
) for
t
eff
=
1000
s
t_{\rm eff}=$1000\text{\,}\mathrm{s}$
in dark time. Although the SiII
λ
​
6335
\lambda 6335
feature is noticeably more noisy, classification could still be possible when additionally taking into account other spectral features. Classifiability even without a visually discernible SiII line was shown to be possible in
Hall
et al.
(
2026
)
. This also indicates that the
Frohmaier
et al.
(
2025
)
criterion of
SNR
15
​
Å
>
3
\rm SNR_{15$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}$}>3
tends to be conservative – if a photo-
z
z
prior exists. Nevertheless, we err on the safe side and do not include
z
>
0.3
z>0.3
SNe in our analysis, rather using the fact that lower-SNR SNe are likely classifiable
(Hall
et al.
,
2026
)
as margin. Future work is needed to investigate a more exact classifiability criteria for our case, where a volume-limited sample is desired to reduce selection effects.
For a single bright exposure of
180
s
180\text{\,}\mathrm{s}
, we determine a maximum redshift of
z
VL
bright
=
0.15
z_{\rm VL}^{\rm bright}=0.15
. Here, a faint SN Ia has
SNR
15
​
Å
=
3.7
\rm SNR_{15$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}$}=3.7
. An average SN Ia has
SNR
15
​
Å
=
8.6
\rm SNR_{15$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}$}=8.6
. Going from
z
=
0.15
z=0.15
to
z
=
0.2
z=0.2
drops
SNR
15
​
Å
\rm SNR_{15$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}$}
to
1.9
1.9
for a faint SN Ia, with classifiability being unlikely.
We emphasize that we use the SiII
λ
​
6335
\lambda 6335
feature more as a check for classifiability; one should not solely rely on it. For example, at redshift
z
=
0.24
z=0.24
, the SiII feature and the atmospheric
O
2
\rm O_{2}
Fraunhofer A absorption line at
7600
Å
7600\text{\,}\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}
(visible in Figure
10
, especially for the “source flux into fiber”) overlap, leading to a much more noisy SiII
λ
​
6335
\lambda 6335
feature. In this case, however, SNRs are high with one dark time exposure, with
SNR
15
​
Å
=
10.0
\rm SNR_{15$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}$}=10.0
for an average SN Ia and
SNR
15
​
Å
=
4.2
\rm SNR_{15$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}$}=4.2
for a faint Ia, so we find that the feature is still visible. But even if not, one can rely on the other (well-measured) features to classify.
To summarize, DESI can provide reliable spectroscopic classification for a volume-limited sample out to
z
VL
dark
=
0.3
z_{\rm VL}^{\rm dark}=0.3
. Although this does not reach the optimal redshifts at
z
=
0.5
z=0.5
to
0.6
0.6
found in §
II
,
Figure
4
shows that there is still a significant amount of cosmological information at
z
<
z
VL
dark
=
0.3
z<z_{\rm VL}^{\rm dark}=0.3
.
IV.2
Scheduling spectroscopic follow-ups
To study the yield of a practical follow-up plan, we generate transients in the high-activity region of Rubin’s Wide-Fast-Deep and implement a sliding window in which DESI could follow up these transients (
Figure
8
). Candidates are generated with a ten-day lifetime in which they can be followed up, and after which they expire – this aims to get them observed near peak consistently. Every night, tiles are ranked by the number of “alive” objects. The top-ranking tiles are then allowed to be “actively triggered” as long as said tile has remaining passes left.
Figure
12
summarizes the number of SNe Ia we are able to follow up with this scheme. In the following, we explain this process.
IV.2.1
Volume-limited SNe Ia and “noise”
DESI will rank tiles based on the total number of objects that pass a magnitude cutoff – without knowledge whether it is a desired object, i.e., a SN Ia in the volume-limited sample below
z
max
z_{\rm max}
, or noise, i.e., non-Ia transients and other SNe Ia. This can lead to tiles with fewer desired SNe Ia being scheduled over tiles with more desired SNe Ia, an effect that impacts DESI’s proficiency at obtaining a volume-limited sample of SNe Ia.
Here, we estimate the probability
p
p
that an object in a magnitude-limited survey is indeed a SN Ia belonging to the volume-limited sample.
The Zwicky Transient Facility found that over 70% of transients were SNe Ia after basic quality cuts, corresponding to
N
tot
/
N
Ia
≈
1.39
N_{\rm tot}/N_{\rm Ia}\approx 1.39
(Perley
et al.
,
2020
)
. Similarly, DES-5year finds
N
tot
/
N
Ia
≈
1.35
N_{\rm tot}/N_{\rm Ia}\approx 1.35
after some basic filtering
(Möller
et al.
,
2022
)
. With a simple toy model calculation for a magnitude-limited survey (Appendix
C
), we find
N
tot
/
N
Ia
≈
1.28
N_{\rm tot}/N_{\rm Ia}\approx 1.28
. Here, we will assume non-Ia objects at a ratio
N
tot
/
N
Ia
=
4
/
3
≈
1.33
N_{\rm tot}/N_{\rm Ia}=4/3\approx 1.33
.
Early-phase-only classifiers exist
(Qu and Sako,
2022
; de Soto
et al.
,
2024
)
, but accuracies are only around 85%, so they are not a suitable candidate selection tool for our purposes here: While false positives (non-Ia appearing as Ia) will be disregarded after spectroscopy, false negatives (Ia gets wrongly excluded) may have a systematic cause, biasing the final cosmological sample of SNe Ia.
Similarly, we do not rely on photometric host galaxy redshifts to exclude SNe Ia above
z
max
z_{\rm max}
from contributing to a tile’s score in this analysis. To estimate the fraction of SNe Ia below and above
z
max
z_{\rm max}
, we compute the simulated signal-to-noise cut with which the population would be 99.9% complete below
z
max
z_{\rm max}
. This SNR cut is translatable to a magnitude cut that has yet to be determined.
Then, we calculate how many SNe that in total satisfy the SNR cut are below that redshift cut. The fraction of SNe Ia below the redshift cuts are
0.42
0.42
for both the
z
VL
bright
=
0.15
z_{\rm VL}^{\rm bright}=0.15
and
z
VL
dark
=
0.3
z_{\rm VL}^{\rm dark}=0.3
cuts. In comparison, ZTF found a value of
0.37
0.37
(Rigault
et al.
,
2025
)
. In this study, we assume a fraction of
0.4
0.4
.
Combined with the non-Ia fraction, the probability of an object being a “desired” volume-limited SN Ia is
p
=
0.3
p=0.3
.
Small percent-level changes in
p
p
lead to even smaller changes in the resulting volume-limited sample, and the general effect of
p
p
on the follow-up efficiency is discussed in future work (J. Truong et al., in prep).
IV.2.2
DESI tile availability
DESI observes the same location on the sky multiple times with different, slightly-offset tiles. We want to take advantage of that, actively triggering a tile visit if it contains many potential SNe Ia.
For simulation purposes, we tile the total DESI/WFD high-activity footprint overlap into discrete, non-overlapping tiles of
8
deg
2
8\text{\,}\deg^{2}
(DESI FoV). How many pointings remain for each simulated tile is calculated based on the actual remaining DESI tiles. The numbers are different for the bright and dark tiles.
Each DESI pointing has a fill factor of 70% of the
8.0
deg
2
8.0\text{\,}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{e}\mathrm{g}^{2}
field-of-view that is accessible from the active fibers. Since the number of supernovae per pointing is of the order of one, this should not lead to losses as long as a dithering scheme is implemented that guarantees good fibers for all candidates within a tile.
IV.2.3
Observability of generated supernovae
Transients are generated directly into the discretized tiles described earlier, which span the entire Rubin high-activity WFD and DESI overlap region. Each tile independently generates volume-limited SNe Ia based on redshift-dependent rates
(Rodney
et al.
,
2014
)
, along with “noise” at the fraction discussed above. We determine the (time-dependent) area that DESI can follow up as follows (
Figure
8
).
The (instantaneous) observable area is computed given the locations of the telescopes, while requiring the observed object to be (i) in both WFD and DESI footprints, (ii) at an altitude
>
>
30
deg
30\text{\,}\deg
above, and (iii) the Sun to be at
<
<
−
15
deg
-15\text{\,}\deg
below the horizon. The daily observable area is then the intersection of all instantaneous observable areas over one night (
Figure
8
). We compute the mean from values calculated 10 days apart and spread over the whole year. The mean daily observable area is
4900
±
540
4900\pm 540
deg
2
\deg^{2}
for DESI (and
2850
±
240
2850\pm 240
deg
2
\deg^{2}
for DESI-II, a potential upgrade of DESI that would start in 2029).
Year two of Rubin is when its rolling cadence commences, and it observes the designated high-activity region for the whole year, then high- and low-activity regions swap for the following season
(Lochner
et al.
,
2018
)
. We estimate the percentage of the general DESI/WFD overlap to be 60% high-activity in 2027.
19
19
19
The 60% number is based on
https://survey-strategy.lsst.io/baseline/wfd.html
, excluding deep drilling fields. The number of SNe Ia scales to first order with
2
​
ln
⁡
M
\sqrt{2\ln M}
, where
M
M
is the number of tiles we can choose from (J. Truong et al., in prep), so forecasts only depend weakly on this percentage.
IV.2.4
Active trigger: Scheduling follow-ups
The observable area constraint is implemented as a sliding window within which DESI tiles may be triggered if they have not been observed yet. We allow a burn-in phase of ten days, which is also our defined lifetime of an object. After that, tiles with the most candidates in them are scheduled each night if they have DESI visits remaining. The effective time allotted to the main survey corresponds to six bright and seven dark exposures per night on average.
This procedure emulates a real observing pipeline: Before each night, one evaluates a stream of potential candidates coming from Rubin. Dark tiles receive a score based on how many candidates pass the dark magnitude cut, and the top-ranking dark tiles are scheduled. The scheduled candidates are removed from the queue, after which the top-ranking bright tiles are scheduled – based on a different magnitude cut for the bright tier. Dark tiles are scheduled first to emulate a true wide/deep wedding-cake style structure and to reduce selection effects (J. Truong et al., in prep).
This simulated follow-up program runs for a total of 320 days. This accounts for the fact that we won’t follow up SNe with incomplete light curves – these SNe would have peaks near the beginning and end of the survey.
20
20
20
We obtained this 320 day window from the output of the simulation described in §
III
; it is the difference between the earliest and latest day of peak of a supernova taken into account in the cosmological analysis.
We use redshift bins with 0.05 width, starting from
z
=
0
z=0
, even though new DESI-Rubin SNe below
z
=
0.05
z=0.05
are not included in the cosmological analysis (see Appendix
B
).
IV.2.5
Follow-up results
Figure 12:
Stacked histogram showing the one-year forecast of spectroscopically followed near-peak (
±
5
\pm 5
days) volume-limited SNe Ia per redshift. The current DESI Transients Survey program, where spare fibers are assigned to live transients if they happen to fall into a planned pointing (blue), would obtain around 880 SNe Ia. When allowing a transient to actively trigger any remaining tile pointing, 2300 SNe Ia can be followed up near peak (orange). This does not impact the completion of DESI’s main survey as SN candidates only the reorder the observing queue. This is effectively a two-tier survey: We have a wide tier that can cover a larger total area with shorter exposure times (bright tiles,
z
<
0.15
z<0.15
), and a deep tier that covers a smaller total area with longer exposure times (dark tiles,
z
<
0.3
z<0.3
).
Figure 13:
Number of pointings with at least one near-peak (
±
5
\pm 5
days) SN Ia per 10-day bin for bright (left) and dark (right) tiles, compared to the available observing time (red). For bright tiles, the small volume at
z
<
0.15
z<0.15
means that available tile pointings initially exceed the supernova rate, but efficiency still decreases continuously as tiles are depleted. For dark tiles, the larger volume produces more SNe, so the program is initially limited by the possible observation time rather than by available tiles or supernova counts. After roughly half a year, the depletion of tiles in the DESI/high-activity-WFD overlap region becomes the dominant bottleneck, limiting the number of SNe that can be followed up.
This baseline survey is defined by the currently remaining DESI tiles, meaning that these spectroscopic observations would come at no added effective exposure times – all we do is allow SNe to trigger pointings that will eventually take place anyway.
With active triggers, 7500 Rubin-discovered objects will be spectroscopically followed up near peak brightness (
±
5
\pm 5
days) in total. 5600 will be confirmed as SNe Ia, out of which 2300 belong to the volume-limited sample. The bright program would discover 390 volume-limited (
z
<
z
VL
bright
=
0.15
z<z_{\rm VL}^{\rm bright}=0.15
) SNe Ia, and the dark program gets 1900 volume-limited (
z
<
z
VL
dark
=
0.3
z<z_{\rm VL}^{\rm dark}=0.3
) SNe Ia.
In contrast, DESI would only follow up 880 volume-limited SNe Ia with a “passive trigger” approach, where spare fibers are assigned if the opportunity arises
(Hall
et al.
,
2026
)
, but tile visits are generally scheduled without considering live transients. This number assumes that tiles can be dithered to guarantee good fibers for all candidates, but this is not what is currently implemented. The current approach, if unchanged, would actually reduce the “passive trigger” yield to
∼
600
\sim 600
SNe Ia.
We find that active triggers produce much better yields, especially for bright tiles. The number of volume-limited low-
z
z
SNe Ia is increased by a factor of three, making this approach highly effective at collecting a large spectroscopically confirmed low-redshift supernova sample.
One can also use additional spare fibers to follow up objects in an extended time window before and after maximum light if they are in an already scheduled tile – that is, without counting them when ranking tiles. For a window of
−
15
-15
to
+
45
+45
days from maximum light (rest frame), a total of over 20,000 spectra could be obtained; a single object would be measured a bit more than twice on average within this expanded time window.
Many regions have tiles with only one DESI pointing left, so if multiple SNe are discovered in these regions some time apart, our baseline program would not allow the tile to be actively triggered. In our study, this significantly reduced the available sky area in which SNe can be followed up, leading to many pointings not containing any SN Ia. For the bright tiles, this is the limiting factor right from the beginning. For the dark tiles, this becomes the bottleneck half a year into the survey (
Figure
13
).
Figure 14:
Efficiency: Fibers per pointing used on volume-limited SNe Ia (left) and all candidates passing the magnitude cut (right) within
±
5
\pm 5
days of maximum light, for bright and dark tiles combined. Even with active triggers, some pointings will not contain a volume-limited SN Ia because tiles can only be scored and scheduled based on the number of all candidates, out of which only around 30% belong to the volume-limited sample of SNe Ia.
IV.3
Spectroscopic follow-up discussion
A DESI spectroscopic follow-up program for Rubin would generate the largest volume-limited sample of spectroscopically confirmed type Ia supernovae with well-controlled photometric systematics to date. Even when operating under the restricted tile budgets of DESI’s main program, one obtains a volume-limited (
z
<
0.3
z<0.3
) sample of 2300 SNe Ia spectra near peak in one year.
In comparison, TiDES
(Frohmaier
et al.
,
2025
)
will spectroscopically measure 13000 SNe Ia over its 5-year duration. However, TiDES plans to observe with fixed “wall-clock” exposure times instead of achieving consistent depths by multiplying an effective exposure time by a factor to compensate for non-ideal observing conditions. Also, currently TiDES does not implement active triggers. Thus, SNe Ia are observed by chance — similar to DESI “passive triggers” but with varying signal-to-noise ratios that lead to selection effects at significantly lower redshift. For TiDES it is estimated that out of the 13000 SNe Ia, 6000 are found at
z
<
0.3
z<0.3
, amounting to 1200
z
<
0.3
z<0.3
SNe per year.
21
21
21
This number is slightly larger than the 880 per year we find with DESI passive triggers despite DESI’s more consistent depths, because the TiDES footprint almost completely overlaps with Rubin, while DESI’s does not.
So TiDES not only produces fewer
z
<
0.3
z<0.3
SNe per year than our proposed program, but their sample will also suffer from selection effects: Where a volume-limited sample has a number distribution
N
​
(
z
)
N(z)
proportional to the comoving volume slice, which implies
N
′
​
(
z
)
>
0
N^{\prime}(z)>0
and
N
′′
​
(
z
)
>
0
N^{\prime\prime}(z)>0
(for each survey tier), the distribution for TiDES already begins to flatten at
z
=
0.15
z=0.15
(
Frohmaier
et al.
(
2025
)
, fig. 4). This indicates that the SNe at
z
>
0.15
z>0.15
are not representative of the underlying population; intrinsically fainter SNe are lost.
Even with the large efficiency gains by actively triggering the optimum DESI tiles, there are several avenues to improve upon the simple scheduling scheme presented here.
One could aim to enhance the fraction of useful, volume-limited SNe Ia, which we called
p
p
earlier. In principle,
p
p
can be enhanced by using spectroscopic host galaxy redshifts whenever available to exclude objects above
z
max
z_{\rm max}
in the scoring. Host galaxy photometric redshifts also could be used to down-weight SN candidates beyond the nominal volume limit. The photometric redshift error bar and confidence would need to be employed careful, to avoid lowering the score for a tile having a true
z
<
z
VL
dark
=
0.3
z<z_{\rm VL}^{\rm dark}=0.3
SNe Ia. Importantly, once such a tile is selected, a fibers can be placed on such down-weighted candidates, providing feedback on this part of the selection process.
Another possibility is to exploit the fact that repeat visits to the same sky area occur through slightly-offset tiles. Being able to choose which one of the visits should be triggered can further increase efficiency (more SNe per pointing), especially in regions where many visits per tile remain. In contrast, our current simulation assumes rigid tile locations.
Building and refining a scheduling pipeline that is both efficient (large
p
p
) without introducing selection effects will be an important future effort, beyond the scope of this initial exploration.
V
Results
Figure 15:
Projected
1
,
2
1,2
and
5
​
σ
5\sigma
contours for the
w
0
w_{0}
and
w
a
w_{a}
parameters of dynamical dark energy, and an inset zoomed in around
Λ
\Lambda
CDM (
w
0
=
−
1
,
w
a
=
0
)
w_{0}=-1,w_{a}=0)
. We combine the current data baseline (gray, DESI BAO+CMB+Union3+low-z SNe as described in §
II
) with one year of DESI’s current transient program (blue), and our proposed survey with SNe actively triggering tile visits (orange). Without increasing total effective observing time, this would lead to significantly tighter constraints, excluding
Λ
\Lambda
CDM at
>
5
​
σ
>5\sigma
for the current best-fit point.
Figure 16:
Stacked histogram of DESI spectroscopic follow-up yields of Rubin WFD targets. Our proposed survey observes around 7500 total objects within
±
5
\pm 5
days of their peak brightness with 3100 actively-triggered pointings. The current spare fiber program would obtain 2800 objects with 3500 passive pointings.
Figure 17:
1
1
and
2
​
σ
2\sigma
projections – SNe only vs. BAO+CMB. The SNe-only contour is almost orthogonal to BAO+CMB. So even though the new SNe are unconstraining on their own (Figure of Merit of only 0.04), combined constraints greatly improve, with Figure of Merit gains of over 50%. This reinforces the importance of evaluating surveys holistically, in combination with other probes.
V.1
Cosmology forecast
This program’s significant advantage arises by reordering DESI’s already planned observations: Supernovae are just used to actively trigger them. Given the finite number of available DESI tile visits, not all SNe discovered in the overlapping survey area can be spectroscopically followed up. To avoid biases, we only include these spectroscopically confirmed SNe Ia within a volume limit in our cosmology analysis.
Our follow-up program is — in terms of
N
SN
​
(
z
)
N_{\rm SN}(z)
— equivalent to having a “wedding cake”-structured survey that has a wide and a deep tier with different sky coverage for each, within which all SNe are observed and followed up. We compute that the projected 2300 total SNe are equivalent to full photometric and spectroscopic observations of a deep tier with
500
deg
2
500\text{\,}\deg^{2}
(
z
<
z
VL
dark
=
0.3
z<z_{\rm VL}^{\rm dark}=0.3
) plus a wide tier
780
deg
2
780\text{\,}\deg^{2}
(
z
<
z
VL
bright
=
0.15
z<z_{\rm VL}^{\rm bright}=0.15
) every day for a year.
The current DESI Transients Survey
(Hall
et al.
,
2026
)
does not change the tile ordering and would only produce 880 supernovae even with optimal fiber assignment, equivalent to a wide tier of
150
deg
2
150\text{\,}\deg^{2}
and deep tier of
210
deg
2
210\text{\,}\deg^{2}
.
Combining current data with the DESI “active trigger” (dynamical tile ordering) SNe, the distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM improves from
3.8
​
σ
3.8\sigma
to
5.9
​
σ
5.9\sigma
if the current best-fit dark energy parameter values don’t change, and the Figure of Merit improves from
108
108
to
171
171
, or by 60%. Without assuming an additional external low-
z
z
SN sample, we reach
5.3
​
σ
5.3\sigma
and
154
154
FoM.
In comparison, the current status quo (passive trigger, rigid tile ordering) would only reach
5.1
​
σ
5.1\sigma
with and
4.5
​
σ
4.5\sigma
without additional low-
z
z
SNe, making the potential confirmation of dynamical dark energy highly dependent on a well-calibrated low-
z
z
sample and the best-fit value.
22
22
22
This raises a technical point: The distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM is calculated as
Δ
​
χ
2
\sqrt{\Delta\chi^{2}}
, while the plotted Gaussian
5
​
σ
5\sigma
contour in 2D corresponds to a
Δ
​
χ
2
=
28.74
\Delta\chi^{2}=28.74
, or
Δ
​
χ
2
≈
5.36
\sqrt{\Delta\chi^{2}}\approx 5.36
, so
Λ
\Lambda
CDM can’t be claimed to be excluded in the 2D parameter plane if the radial distance barely exceeds
5
​
σ
5\sigma
.
By simply going from passive to active triggers, we almost triple the total number of SNe, increasing the projected distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM by nearly one full standard deviation.
We show our findings for the different scenarios in a plot of
w
0
−
w
a
w_{0}-w_{a}
error ellipses, including
5
​
σ
5\sigma
contours, in
Section
V
, and total numbers in
Figure
16
.
V.2
The importance to evaluate combined surveys
We also show the error ellipses, broken down per source, in
Figure
17
. Clearly, the new SNe do not offer tight constraints on their own. However, the SN error ellipse is nearly orthogonal to the BAO+CMB ellipse. This is because low-redshift, nearby SNe are primarily sensitive to the current equation of state
w
0
w_{0}
, while BAO and CMB constrain an integrated combination of
w
0
w_{0}
and
w
a
w_{a}
over a much larger redshift range.
Evaluated on a standalone FoM of just 0.04, there would be no chance our proposed survey would ever be considered – the current Union3 dataset alone has a FoM two orders of magnitude higher – even though the combined FoM is ultimately improved by almost 50. We thus recommend survey design decisions be made with combined forecasts in mind: Doing so allowed us to identify SNe Ia with
z
<
0.3
z<0.3
as a fast path to test dynamical dark energy.
V.3
Impact of systematics on cosmology
Figure 18:
Zero-point calibration priors versus posteriors for each Rubin filter. The unified fitting framework allows for self-calibration, reducing posterior uncertainties by up to 40% relative to the assumed priors. However, we find no floor beyond which the posterior uncertainty is always lower than the prior uncertainty for any realistic prior. This indicates a potential prior-dependence of cosmology results in hierarchical Bayesian frameworks even after self-calibration, and warrants further investigation.
Figure 19:
Distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM in
σ
\sigma
(left) and Dark Energy Task Force Figure of Merit (right) as a function of the assumed zero-point calibration prior and gray dispersion — the two dominant systematics most likely to improve in the near future. Values in parentheses correspond to forecasts without a separate sample of new low-
z
z
supernova. The
5
​
σ
5\sigma
threshold is reached or exceeded across a wide range of assumed priors. Neither systematic alone drives the final constraints.
The sensitivity of frequentist dark energy analyses
(Brout
et al.
,
2022
; DES Collaboration
et al.
,
2024
)
to calibration and systematics has recently been pointed out by
Efstathiou (
2025
)
. A re-analysis of the DES-5Y supernova sample
(DES Collaboration
et al.
,
2024
)
, motivated by newer calibration methods
(Popovic
et al.
,
2025a
)
, led to a change in the distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM by
1
​
σ
1\sigma
(Popovic
et al.
,
2025b
)
.
In a Bayesian framework such as
Rubin
et al.
(
2025a
)
, the dependence on the assumed calibration is partially absorbed by the model’s improved ability to self-calibrate (
Kim and Miquel (
2006
)
, and described in §
III
). But even then,
Rubin
et al.
(
2025b
)
shows that the Figure of Merit depends strongly on the assumed priors on zero-point calibration and fundamental color uncertainty, and weakly on wavelength uncertainty and the uncertainty on the count-rate nonlinearity (not applicable to Rubin CCD detectors).
Here, we check how cosmological constraints depend on the zero-point calibration and assumed dispersion: These are the most likely uncertainties to be improved.
For example, recent filter re-calibration efforts for the Pantheon
+
+
and DES-Y5 supernovae now achieve 2 to
3
mmag
3\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
internal precision per filter
(Popovic
et al.
,
2025a
)
. LSST aims for internal calibration precision of
1
mmag
1\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
(The LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration
et al.
,
2018
)
. We allow the priors on the zero-point uncertainty to vary from 1 to
5
mmag
5\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
, with the latter as our currently-assumed baseline. Through the unified fitting process, the filters self-calibrate to varying degrees, leading to posterior zero-point uncertainties that are smaller by up to 40%. This effect is broken down by filter in
Figure
18
.
A potential “point of stability” towards which the posterior uncertainty choice would converge (after multiple iterations where the next priors are changed to the current posterior) does not seem to exist for any reasonable priors above
1
mmag
1\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
. Thus, the choice of calibration priors impacts the final cosmology, even when allowing for self-calibration. We also noticed that the assumed dispersion has little impact (sub-1%) on the self-calibrated posterior uncertainty.
The remaining scatter in supernova magnitudes after standardization depends on the ability of the model to capture SN-to-SN variability, and is expected to decrease as models improve. We broke the typical scatter of
0.15
mag
0.15\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
down into a gray dispersion (
0.10
mag
0.10\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
) applied across the whole supernova, and per-filter color dispersion (§
III
) of
0.03
mag
0.03\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
. Here, we allow for the gray dispersion to vary broadly – from an optimistic
0.06
mag
0.06\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
, currently only reachable with spectroscopic standardization methods (§
VI
), to
0.14
mag
0.14\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
, which would correspond to using a model trained on substantially noisier photometric data even when compared to current-generation measurements
(Rigault
et al.
,
2025
; Rubin
et al.
,
2025a
)
.
For these different scenarios, we compute the distances from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM in
σ
\sigma
and DETF FoMs, with (and without) the inclusion of a ZTF-like sample of low-
z
z
supernovae. The results are summarized in
Figure
19
. Distances from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM range from just below
5
​
σ
5\sigma
when excluding new low-
z
z
SNe to
7
​
σ
7\sigma
in the optimal case. We find that there is not a single parameter driving the final uncertainties; rather, achieving further improved constraints depends on both (unexplained) dispersion and filter calibration.
VI
Potential Enhancements
VI.1
Spectroscopic standardization
as an independent cross-check
If a significant signal of dynamical dark energy were found, having a completely different SN standardization method arrive at the same conclusion would strengthen the discovery claim significantly. Spectroscopic standardization could offer a way to verify cosmology results independent of light curve analyses.
Fakhouri
et al.
(
2015
)
showed that “twin” SNe Ia (SNe with similar spectra) have a similar absolute magnitude and that in general, subsets of SNe with more similar spectra have a reduced dispersion. Using this, “twinning” methods have been developed to standardize SNe Ia using their near-peak spectra instead of their light curves. For example, Twins Embedding (
Boone
et al.
2021a
,
b
) generalizes the approach of
Fakhouri
et al.
(
2015
)
by projecting near-peak spectra onto a lower-dimensional embedding which describes intrinsic variabilities, and performs standardization based on that.
Stein
et al.
(
2022
)
generalize this further, using the entire spectral time series to standardize with a Probabilistic Autoencoder (PAE)
(Böhm and Seljak,
2020
)
.
Both Twins Embedding and PAE achieve significantly lower unexplained dispersions of
0.07
mag
0.07\text{\,}\mathrm{m}\mathrm{a}\mathrm{g}
. Even with noisier data, this has been shown to outperform traditional photometric standardization methods
(Rubin
et al.
,
2025b
)
.
These data-driven machine-learning-based approaches have several advantages – standardization no longer relies on empirical astrophysical relations. Thus, astrophysical effects do not need to be considered separately. One example is the supernova mass step, a phenomenon describing the fact that SNe in massive galaxies appear systematically brighter
(Kelly
et al.
,
2010
; Sullivan
et al.
,
2010
)
even after SALT standardization. With Twins Embedding, this systematic was not found post-standardization, suggesting that the data-driven model already accounts for the mass step. Recently,
Ganot
et al.
(
2025
)
demonstrated that even with low signal-to-noise spectra from ZTF, there was no mass step observed after standardization via Twins Embedding, even though with that observing program the overall spectral quality proved to be too low to improve the unexplained dispersion.
SpecSim
(§
IV
) predicts that SN spectra taken with DESI will almost always significantly exceed the signal-to-noise values of the ZTF spectra used in
Ganot
et al.
(
2025
)
—a highly promising sign for the viability of twinning. However, our current SNR estimates do not yet account for the noise introduced by host galaxy subtraction for a separate later DESI observation. A discrete spectral subtraction of the host light (here DESI’s very accurate fiber placement capability would prove critical,
Guy
et al.
(
2023
)
), but template-based host subtraction might prove viable given the millions of galaxies DESI has already observed.
We leave a detailed study of using DESI spectra for precise standardization, including realistic host galaxy modeling, to future work.
Figure 20:
Distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM and Figure of Merit when adding supernovae at two redshift bins (
z
1
z_{1}
and
z
2
z_{2}
) with
10
​
m
​
m
​
a
​
g
10\rm mmag
total uncertainty each to baseline data (§
II
) plus DESI “active trigger” SNe. Compared to Figure
5
, optimizing for FoM and distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM result in different optimal redshift combinations. However, both cases prefer to have a medium-redshift sample at
z
≈
0.6
z\approx 0.6
.
Figure 21:
Projected
1
,
2
1,2
and
5
​
σ
5\sigma
contours after adding two hypothetical supernova measurements at the redshifts that optimize either the Figure of Merit (blue) or the
σ
\sigma
-distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM (orange), on top of the new baseline (
Section
V
). Optimizing for FoM shrinks the error ellipse but leaves it pointing toward
Λ
\Lambda
CDM. Optimizing for
σ
\sigma
-distance produces a larger error ellipse overall, but tilts contours further from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM.
VI.2
Further synergies and future surveys
VI.2.1
Training Rubin pipelines
The number of transients spectroscopically followed up by a one-year DESI active trigger program would exceed current photometric classification training datasets by an order of magnitude. Such a sample would serve as both a
stress test and a major expansion of the training data for Rubin’s photometric redshift and classification pipelines. TiDES
(Frohmaier
et al.
,
2025
)
will ultimately obtain more objects, but over five years and with selection effects; early improvements from a DESI program could propagate to all cosmology results over Rubin’s projected ten-year lifetime.
VI.2.2
Optimal redshifts for
w
0
w_{0}
and
w
a
w_{a}
in the future
If we find strong evidence against
Λ
\Lambda
CDM, the next step would look beyond the simple
w
0
−
w
a
w_{0}-w_{a}
parametrization of dynamical dark energy. However, here we complete the
w
0
−
w
a
w_{0}-w_{a}
story by repeating the exercise of §
II
, but now asking which additional supernovae synergize best with the projected DESI-Rubin dataset (plus the baseline from §
II
). Such re-optimization for
σ
\sigma
-distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM and Figure of Merit points to the next avenue for improving dark energy constraints with SNe Ia.
Figure
21
shows that the
σ
\sigma
-distance is maximized by a combination of a very low-redshift sample at
z
≈
0.05
z\approx 0.05
and a mid-redshift sample at
z
≈
0.55
z\approx 0.55
. The Figure of Merit is maximized by mid-redshift SNe at
z
≈
0.6
z\approx 0.6
and high-redshift SNe at
z
≳
1.5
z\gtrsim 1.5
.
The resulting error ellipses of
Figure
21
illustrate why: optimizing for FoM shrinks the ellipse but does not change its orientation, so its semi-major axis still points toward
Λ
\Lambda
CDM. Optimizing for
σ
\sigma
-distance instead constrains
w
0
w_{0}
more tightly, tilting the error ellipse away from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM. This is expected: the low-
z
z
component of the
σ
\sigma
-optimal combination probes late-time dark energy, which is primarily encoded in
w
0
w_{0}
.
Evaluating both metrics thus seems useful when designing future surveys; optimizing for both may yield the most robust dark energy measurements.
23
23
23
Purely optimizing for the
σ
\sigma
-distance is speculative, as the best-fit point may shift with future data. But optimizing for FoM carries its own risk: one might end up with an error ellipse whose semi-major axis points directly at
Λ
\Lambda
CDM, weakening a potential discovery claim.
Targeting a combination of very low-, medium- (
z
≈
0.6
z\approx 0.6
), and high-redshift supernovae thus appears most informative. High-redshift (
z
>
1
z>1
) SNe will be measured by space telescopes such as Roman
(Spergel
et al.
,
2015
)
and Lazuli
(Roy
et al.
,
2026
)
. Hence, we now discuss how the low- and medium-redshift tiers could be tackled with DESI and Rubin.
VI.2.3
Low redshifts: Rubin micro and twilight surveys
Spectroscopy of very low-redshift supernovae (
z
≲
0.1
z\lesssim 0.1
) are easily tractable from the ground. A small Rubin micro survey
24
24
24
https://pstn-055.lsst.io/
; defined as
<
3
%
<3\%
of survey time.
targeting the DESI-II fields north of the WFD border could cover
500
deg
2
500\text{\,}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{e}\mathrm{g}^{2}
per night in a single filter with short exposures in under ten minutes, corresponding to just 0.2% of total survey time for a one-year campaign.
25
25
25
Rubin’s
9.6
deg
2
9.6\text{\,}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{e}\mathrm{g}^{2}
FoV enables it to observe
3450
deg
2
3450\text{\,}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{e}\mathrm{g}^{2}
per hour at 6 pointings per minute. After overhead, this leaves 3 to 4 s exposures per pointing – more than enough for SNe at
z
<
0.1
z<0.1
.
The resulting imaging data could also aid DESI-II target selection.
Alternatively, a Rubin twilight program (X. Tang et al., in prep) would follow nearby, bright supernovae during times that are outside the main Rubin survey window each night.
In either case, classification with DESI requires only
t
eff
<
30
s
t_{\rm eff}<$30\text{\,}\mathrm{s}$
, so these objects could even be observed with what DESI refers to as a backup tile
(Schlafly
et al.
,
2023
)
.
VI.2.4
Medium redshifts: Deep Drilling Field follow-ups
Medium-redshift supernovae at
z
≈
0.5
z\approx 0.5
–
0.6
0.6
sit in a gap that a dedicated DESI follow-up program targeting Rubin’s Deep Drilling Fields (DDFs) could help fill. Time dilation keeps supernovae near peak for longer in the observer frame, and we estimate with
SpecSim
(§
IV
) that two three-hour exposures per month suffice to continuously classify faint SNe Ia at
z
=
0.5
z=0.5
, increasing to two five-hour exposures for faint SNe Ia at
z
=
0.55
z=0.55
. Such a program would yield 100 spectroscopically-confirmed SNe Ia per year, many at the most informative redshifts around
z
=
0.5
z=0.5
.
VI.2.5
DESI-II
A potential DESI-II survey would cover a smaller footprint with good Rubin overlap over a projected six-year duration (
Figure
8
). A supernova program analogous to the one proposed here would fit naturally into the first two years, when most tiles are still available and SNe can actively trigger observations with few restrictions — consistently targeting tiles with multiple SNe per pointing. Despite the smaller footprint, we estimate that DESI-II could follow up 7000 SNe Ia near peak per year until tile depletion becomes a limiting factor. DESI-II could also continue a DDF follow-up program.
VII
Conclusions
We investigated a fast path to test dynamical dark energy versus
Λ
\Lambda
CDM at the
>
5
​
σ
>5\sigma
level. Considering current CMB, BAO and SN data, we found that Type Ia supernovae provide good leverage on
w
0
w_{0}
and
w
a
w_{a}
at redshifts near dark energy-matter equality (§
II
). We considered two major Stage-IV cosmology experiments – the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument and the Vera C. Rubin Observatory – that share the common goal of measuring dynamical dark energy, and found that they synergize well in this redshift range.
We designed a DESI spectroscopic follow-up program of Rubin-discovered supernovae at essentially no added observing cost: The total number of tile visits is fixed by DESI’s main survey; supernovae simply act as triggers that reorder the queue, allowing SN spectra to be measured opportunistically, all while the main survey completes as planned. The overlap of DESI and Rubin’s Wide Fast Deep rolling cadence in 2027 provides a window of at least one year to execute this program (§
IV
).
Under baseline assumptions (§
II
, §
III
), our forecast reaches a
5.9
​
σ
5.9\sigma
distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM at the current best-fit values for
w
0
w_{0}
and
w
a
w_{a}
(§
V
). We obtained these results with a unified fitter that takes into account the most important systematics and their correlations.
A
5
​
σ
5\sigma
result is necessary but not sufficient for a credible discovery claim. Few “moving parts” as well as independent cross-checks are important for credibility. Our program provides both: it eliminates common systematics from selection effects, photometric redshift uncertainties and failures, and photometric classification biases. Additionally, the possibility for spectroscopic standardization not only offers a cross-check of results from traditional analyses that use empirical light-curve fitters, but could even improve precision through reduced per-supernova scatter.
A methodological lesson emerges from this work. The standalone Figure of Merit of our proposed survey is two orders of magnitude smaller than existing supernova compilations, yet it yields a 50% improvement when combined with current data. Evaluating surveys and probes in isolation can thus mislead when it comes to survey design and prioritization, and we therefore recommend holistic assessments that include all existing datasets.
Beyond dynamical dark energy measurements, this sample will provide training data for photometric classifiers and photo-
z
z
estimators, and thus will serve as a timely stress test of Rubin pipelines. Early improvements prompted by this cross-check could compound over Rubin’s full ten-year lifetime and influence a whole generation of cosmology measurements.
DESI follow-up of Rubin supernovae from a combination of the Wide Fast Deep (this work), a potential low-
z
z
program, and the Deep Drilling Fields would provide a unique opportunity (§
VI
): Supernova cosmology could be performed with a clean, spectroscopically confirmed, homogeneous sample, without results hinging on the difficult task of cross-calibrating across different photometric systems. We intend to study such a comprehensive supernova program in future work.
We thank John Banovetz and Samuel Brieden for their detailed and helpful comments on the manuscript and insights into DESI operations, and Xander Hall, Antonella Palmese, Eric Linder and Julien Guy for useful discussions. This work was supported in part by the Director, Office of Science, Office of High Energy Physics of the US Department of Energy under contract No. DE-AC025CH11231.
{contribution}
JT led the detailed analysis, ran the simulations, and wrote the bulk of the paper. GA conceived the use of DESI in the active trigger mode, developed initial feasibility calculations, and provided regular and detailed input on the analysis and manuscript. SP supervised the project and provided regular feedback on the analysis and manuscript. DR assisted with running the distance modulus covariance matrix code and provided feedback on the analysis and manuscript. DS provided extensive insights into DESI at all stages of this project and provided feedback on the analysis and manuscript.
References
M. Abdul Karim, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, L. Allen, C. Allende Prieto, O. Alves, A. Anand, U. Andrade, E. Armengaud, A. Aviles, S. Bailey, C. Baltay, P. Bansal, A. Bault, J. Behera, S. BenZvi, D. Bianchi, C. Blake, S. Brieden, A. Brodzeller, D. Brooks, E. Buckley-Geer, E. Burtin, R. Calderon, R. Canning, A. C. Rosell, P. Carrilho, L. Casas, F. J. Castander, M. Charles, E. Chaussidon, J. Chaves-Montero, D. Chebat, X. Chen, T. Claybaugh, S. Cole, A. P. Cooper, A. Cuceu, K. S. Dawson, A. de la Macorra, A. de Mattia, N. Deiosso, J. Della Costa, R. Demina, A. Dey, B. Dey, Z. Ding, P. Doel, J. Edelstein, D. J. Eisenstein, W. Elbers, P. Fagrelius, K. Fanning, E. Fernández-García, S. Ferraro, A. Font-Ribera, J. E. Forero-Romero, C. S. Frenk, C. Garcia-Quintero, L. H. Garrison, E. Gaztañaga, H. Gil-Marín, S. Gontcho A Gontcho, D. Gonzalez, A. X. Gonzalez-Morales, C. Gordon, D. Green, G. Gutierrez, J. Guy, B. Hadzhiyska, C. Hahn, S. He, M. Herbold, H. K. Herrera-Alcantar, M.-F. Ho, K. Honscheid, C. Howlett, D. Huterer, M. Ishak, S. Juneau, N. V. Kamble, N. G. Karaçaylı, R. Kehoe, S. Kent, A. G. Kim, D. Kirkby, T. Kisner, S. E. Koposov, A. Kremin, A. Krolewski, O. Lahav, C. Lamman, M. Landriau, D. Lang, J. Lasker, J. M. Le Goff, L. Le Guillou, A. Leauthaud, M. E. Levi, Q. Li, T. S. Li, K. Lodha, M. Lokken, F. Lozano-Rodríguez, C. Magneville, M. Manera, P. Martini, W. L. Matthewson, A. Meisner, J. Mena-Fernández, A. Menegas, T. Mergulhão, R. Miquel, J. Moustakas, A. Muñoz-Gutiérrez, D. Muñoz-Santos, A. D. Myers, S. Nadathur, K. Naidoo, L. Napolitano, J. A. Newman, G. Niz, H. E. Noriega, E. Paillas, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, J. Pan, J. A. Peacock, M. Pellejero Ibanez, W. J. Percival, A. Pérez-Fernández, I. Pérez-Ràfols, M. M. Pieri, C. Poppett, F. Prada, D. Rabinowitz, A. Raichoor, C. Ramírez-Pérez, M. Rashkovetskyi, C. Ravoux, J. Rich, A. Rocher, C. Rockosi, J. Rohlf, J. O. Román-Herrera, A. J. Ross, G. Rossi, R. Ruggeri, V. Ruhlmann-Kleider, L. Samushia, E. Sanchez, N. Sanders, D. Schlegel, M. Schubnell, H. Seo, A. Shafieloo, R. Sharples, J. Silber, F. Sinigaglia, D. Sprayberry, T. Tan, G. Tarlé, P. Taylor, W. Turner, L. A. Ureña-López, R. Vaisakh, F. Valdes, G. Valogiannis, M. Vargas-Magaña, L. Verde, M. Walther, B. A. Weaver, D. H. Weinberg, M. White, M. Wolfson, C. Yèche, J. Yu, E. A. Zaborowski, P. Zarrouk, Z. Zhai, H. Zhang, C. Zhao, G. B. Zhao, R. Zhou, H. Zou, and DESI Collaboration (2025)
DESI DR2 results. II. Measurements of baryon acoustic oscillations and cosmological constraints
.
Phys. Rev. D
112
(
8
),
pp. 083515
.
External Links:
Document
,
2503.14738
Cited by:
§A.1
,
Figure 1
,
§I
,
§II.2
,
§II.2
,
footnote 1
.
A. Albrecht, G. Bernstein, R. Cahn, W. L. Freedman, J. Hewitt, W. Hu, J. Huth, M. Kamionkowski, E. W. Kolb, L. Knox, J. C. Mather, S. Staggs, and N. B. Suntzeff (2006)
Report of the Dark Energy Task Force
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. astro–ph/0609591
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0609591
Cited by:
§A.2
,
§I
,
§II
.
G. Aldering, G. Adam, P. Antilogus, P. Astier, R. Bacon, S. Bongard, C. Bonnaud, Y. Copin, D. Hardin, F. Henault, D. A. Howell, J. Lemonnier, J. Levy, S. C. Loken, P. E. Nugent, R. Pain, A. Pecontal, E. Pecontal, S. Perlmutter, R. M. Quimby, K. Schahmaneche, G. Smadja, and W. M. Wood-Vasey (2002)
Overview of the Nearby Supernova Factory
.
In
Survey and Other Telescope Technologies and Discoveries
,
J. A. Tyson and S. Wolff (Eds.)
,
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series
, Vol.
4836
,
pp. 61–72
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§IV.1.1
.
Astropy Collaboration, A. M. Price-Whelan, B. M. Sipőcz, H. M. Günther, P. L. Lim, S. M. Crawford, S. Conseil, D. L. Shupe, M. W. Craig, N. Dencheva, A. Ginsburg, J. T. Vand erPlas, L. D. Bradley, D. Pérez-Suárez, M. de Val-Borro, T. L. Aldcroft, K. L. Cruz, T. P. Robitaille, E. J. Tollerud, C. Ardelean, T. Babej, Y. P. Bach, M. Bachetti, A. V. Bakanov, S. P. Bamford, G. Barentsen, P. Barmby, A. Baumbach, K. L. Berry, F. Biscani, M. Boquien, K. A. Bostroem, L. G. Bouma, G. B. Brammer, E. M. Bray, H. Breytenbach, H. Buddelmeijer, D. J. Burke, G. Calderone, J. L. Cano Rodríguez, M. Cara, J. V. M. Cardoso, S. Cheedella, Y. Copin, L. Corrales, D. Crichton, D. D’Avella, C. Deil, É. Depagne, J. P. Dietrich, A. Donath, M. Droettboom, N. Earl, T. Erben, S. Fabbro, L. A. Ferreira, T. Finethy, R. T. Fox, L. H. Garrison, S. L. J. Gibbons, D. A. Goldstein, R. Gommers, J. P. Greco, P. Greenfield, A. M. Groener, F. Grollier, A. Hagen, P. Hirst, D. Homeier, A. J. Horton, G. Hosseinzadeh, L. Hu, J. S. Hunkeler, Ž. Ivezić, A. Jain, T. Jenness, G. Kanarek, S. Kendrew, N. S. Kern, W. E. Kerzendorf, A. Khvalko, J. King, D. Kirkby, A. M. Kulkarni, A. Kumar, A. Lee, D. Lenz, S. P. Littlefair, Z. Ma, D. M. Macleod, M. Mastropietro, C. McCully, S. Montagnac, B. M. Morris, M. Mueller, S. J. Mumford, D. Muna, N. A. Murphy, S. Nelson, G. H. Nguyen, J. P. Ninan, M. Nöthe, S. Ogaz, S. Oh, J. K. Parejko, N. Parley, S. Pascual, R. Patil, A. A. Patil, A. L. Plunkett, J. X. Prochaska, T. Rastogi, V. Reddy Janga, J. Sabater, P. Sakurikar, M. Seifert, L. E. Sherbert, H. Sherwood-Taylor, A. Y. Shih, J. Sick, M. T. Silbiger, S. Singanamalla, L. P. Singer, P. H. Sladen, K. A. Sooley, S. Sornarajah, O. Streicher, P. Teuben, S. W. Thomas, G. R. Tremblay, J. E. H. Turner, V. Terrón, M. H. van Kerkwijk, A. de la Vega, L. L. Watkins, B. A. Weaver, J. B. Whitmore, J. Woillez, V. Zabalza, and Astropy Contributors (2018)
The Astropy Project: Building an Open-science Project and Status of the v2.0 Core Package
.
AJ
156
(
3
),
pp. 123
.
External Links:
Document
,
1801.02634
Cited by:
Testing
Λ
\Lambda
CDM versus dynamical dark energy in one year:
A DESI spectroscopic follow-up program for Rubin supernovae
.
Astropy Collaboration, A. M. Price-Whelan, P. L. Lim, N. Earl, N. Starkman, L. Bradley, D. L. Shupe, A. A. Patil, L. Corrales, C. E. Brasseur, M. N”othe, A. Donath, E. Tollerud, B. M. Morris, A. Ginsburg, E. Vaher, B. A. Weaver, J. Tocknell, W. Jamieson, M. H. van Kerkwijk, T. P. Robitaille, B. Merry, M. Bachetti, H. M. G”unther, T. L. Aldcroft, J. A. Alvarado-Montes, A. M. Archibald, A. B’odi, S. Bapat, G. Barentsen, J. Baz’an, M. Biswas, M. Boquien, D. J. Burke, D. Cara, M. Cara, K. E. Conroy, S. Conseil, M. W. Craig, R. M. Cross, K. L. Cruz, F. D’Eugenio, N. Dencheva, H. A. R. Devillepoix, J. P. Dietrich, A. D. Eigenbrot, T. Erben, L. Ferreira, D. Foreman-Mackey, R. Fox, N. Freij, S. Garg, R. Geda, L. Glattly, Y. Gondhalekar, K. D. Gordon, D. Grant, P. Greenfield, A. M. Groener, S. Guest, S. Gurovich, R. Handberg, A. Hart, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, D. Homeier, G. Hosseinzadeh, T. Jenness, C. K. Jones, P. Joseph, J. B. Kalmbach, E. Karamehmetoglu, M. Kaluszy’nski, M. S. P. Kelley, N. Kern, W. E. Kerzendorf, E. W. Koch, S. Kulumani, A. Lee, C. Ly, Z. Ma, C. MacBride, J. M. Maljaars, D. Muna, N. A. Murphy, H. Norman, R. O’Steen, K. A. Oman, C. Pacifici, S. Pascual, J. Pascual-Granado, R. R. Patil, G. I. Perren, T. E. Pickering, T. Rastogi, B. R. Roulston, D. F. Ryan, E. S. Rykoff, J. Sabater, P. Sakurikar, J. Salgado, A. Sanghi, N. Saunders, V. Savchenko, L. Schwardt, M. Seifert-Eckert, A. Y. Shih, A. S. Jain, G. Shukla, J. Sick, C. Simpson, S. Singanamalla, L. P. Singer, J. Singhal, M. Sinha, B. M. SipHocz, L. R. Spitler, D. Stansby, O. Streicher, J. ﬀSumak, J. D. Swinbank, D. S. Taranu, N. Tewary, G. R. Tremblay, M. d. Val-Borro, S. J. Van Kooten, Z. Vasovi’c, S. Verma, J. V. de Miranda Cardoso, P. K. G. Williams, T. J. Wilson, B. Winkel, W. M. Wood-Vasey, R. Xue, P. Yoachim, C. Zhang, A. Zonca, and Astropy Project Contributors (2022)
The Astropy Project: Sustaining and Growing a Community-oriented Open-source Project and the Latest Major Release (v5.0) of the Core Package
.
ApJ
935
(
2
),
pp. 167
.
External Links:
Document
,
2206.14220
Cited by:
Testing
Λ
\Lambda
CDM versus dynamical dark energy in one year:
A DESI spectroscopic follow-up program for Rubin supernovae
.
Astropy Collaboration, T. P. Robitaille, E. J. Tollerud, P. Greenfield, M. Droettboom, E. Bray, T. Aldcroft, M. Davis, A. Ginsburg, A. M. Price-Whelan, W. E. Kerzendorf, A. Conley, N. Crighton, K. Barbary, D. Muna, H. Ferguson, F. Grollier, M. M. Parikh, P. H. Nair, H. M. Unther, C. Deil, J. Woillez, S. Conseil, R. Kramer, J. E. H. Turner, L. Singer, R. Fox, B. A. Weaver, V. Zabalza, Z. I. Edwards, K. Azalee Bostroem, D. J. Burke, A. R. Casey, S. M. Crawford, N. Dencheva, J. Ely, T. Jenness, K. Labrie, P. L. Lim, F. Pierfederici, A. Pontzen, A. Ptak, B. Refsdal, M. Servillat, and O. Streicher (2013)
Astropy: A community Python package for astronomy
.
A&A
558
,
pp. A33
.
External Links:
Document
,
1307.6212
Cited by:
Testing
Λ
\Lambda
CDM versus dynamical dark energy in one year:
A DESI spectroscopic follow-up program for Rubin supernovae
.
K. Barbary, Rbiswas4, D. Goldstein, S. Rodney, S. W. Jha, M. Wood-Vasey, C. Sofiatti, U. Feindt, B. Friesen, T. Barclay, R. C. Thomas, M. Craig, and G. Barentsen (2016)
sncosmo/sncosmo: v1.4.0
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§B.1
,
Testing
Λ
\Lambda
CDM versus dynamical dark energy in one year:
A DESI spectroscopic follow-up program for Rubin supernovae
.
E. C. Bellm, S. R. Kulkarni, M. J. Graham, R. Dekany, R. M. Smith, R. Riddle, F. J. Masci, G. Helou, T. A. Prince, S. M. Adams, C. Barbarino, T. Barlow, J. Bauer, R. Beck, J. Belicki, R. Biswas, N. Blagorodnova, D. Bodewits, B. Bolin, V. Brinnel, T. Brooke, B. Bue, M. Bulla, R. Burruss, S. B. Cenko, C. Chang, A. Connolly, M. Coughlin, J. Cromer, V. Cunningham, K. De, A. Delacroix, V. Desai, D. A. Duev, G. Eadie, T. L. Farnham, M. Feeney, U. Feindt, D. Flynn, A. Franckowiak, S. Frederick, C. Fremling, A. Gal-Yam, S. Gezari, M. Giomi, D. A. Goldstein, V. Z. Golkhou, A. Goobar, S. Groom, E. Hacopians, D. Hale, J. Henning, A. Y. Q. Ho, D. Hover, J. Howell, T. Hung, D. Huppenkothen, D. Imel, W. Ip, Ž. Ivezić, E. Jackson, L. Jones, M. Juric, M. M. Kasliwal, S. Kaspi, S. Kaye, M. S. P. Kelley, M. Kowalski, E. Kramer, T. Kupfer, W. Landry, R. R. Laher, C. Lee, H. W. Lin, Z. Lin, R. Lunnan, M. Giomi, A. Mahabal, P. Mao, A. A. Miller, S. Monkewitz, P. Murphy, C. Ngeow, J. Nordin, P. Nugent, E. Ofek, M. T. Patterson, B. Penprase, M. Porter, L. Rauch, U. Rebbapragada, D. Reiley, M. Rigault, H. Rodriguez, J. van Roestel, B. Rusholme, J. van Santen, S. Schulze, D. L. Shupe, L. P. Singer, M. T. Soumagnac, R. Stein, J. Surace, J. Sollerman, P. Szkody, F. Taddia, S. Terek, A. Van Sistine, S. van Velzen, W. T. Vestrand, R. Walters, C. Ward, Q. Ye, P. Yu, L. Yan, and J. Zolkower (2019)
The Zwicky Transient Facility: System Overview, Performance, and First Results
.
PASP
131
(
995
),
pp. 018002
.
External Links:
Document
,
1902.01932
Cited by:
§II.2
.
M. Betoule, R. Kessler, J. Guy, J. Mosher, D. Hardin, R. Biswas, P. Astier, P. El-Hage, M. Konig, S. Kuhlmann, J. Marriner, R. Pain, N. Regnault, C. Balland, B. A. Bassett, P. J. Brown, H. Campbell, R. G. Carlberg, F. Cellier-Holzem, D. Cinabro, A. Conley, C. B. D’Andrea, D. L. DePoy, M. Doi, R. S. Ellis, S. Fabbro, A. V. Filippenko, R. J. Foley, J. A. Frieman, D. Fouchez, L. Galbany, A. Goobar, R. R. Gupta, G. J. Hill, R. Hlozek, C. J. Hogan, I. M. Hook, D. A. Howell, S. W. Jha, L. Le Guillou, G. Leloudas, C. Lidman, J. L. Marshall, A. Möller, A. M. Mourão, J. Neveu, R. Nichol, M. D. Olmstead, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, S. Perlmutter, J. L. Prieto, C. J. Pritchet, M. Richmond, A. G. Riess, V. Ruhlmann-Kleider, M. Sako, K. Schahmaneche, D. P. Schneider, M. Smith, J. Sollerman, M. Sullivan, N. A. Walton, and C. J. Wheeler (2014)
Improved cosmological constraints from a joint analysis of the SDSS-II and SNLS supernova samples
.
A&A
568
,
pp. A22
.
External Links:
Document
,
1401.4064
Cited by:
§III.2
,
§IV.1
.
R. C. Bohlin, K. D. Gordon, and P.-E. Tremblay (2014)
Techniques and Review of Absolute Flux Calibration from the Ultraviolet to the Mid-Infrared
.
PASP
126
(
942
),
pp. 711
.
External Links:
Document
,
1406.1707
Cited by:
§II.1
,
3rd item
.
V. Böhm and U. Seljak (2020)
Probabilistic Autoencoder
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2006.05479
.
External Links:
Document
,
2006.05479
Cited by:
§VI.1
.
K. Boone, G. Aldering, P. Antilogus, C. Aragon, S. Bailey, C. Baltay, S. Bongard, C. Buton, Y. Copin, S. Dixon, D. Fouchez, E. Gangler, R. Gupta, B. Hayden, W. Hillebrandt, A. G. Kim, M. Kowalski, D. Küsters, P.-F. Léget, F. Mondon, J. Nordin, R. Pain, E. Pecontal, R. Pereira, S. Perlmutter, K. A. Ponder, D. Rabinowitz, M. Rigault, D. Rubin, K. Runge, C. Saunders, G. Smadja, N. Suzuki, C. Tao, S. Taubenberger, R. C. Thomas, and M. Vincenzi (2021a)
The Twins Embedding of Type Ia Supernovae. I. The Diversity of Spectra at Maximum Light
.
ApJ
912
(
1
),
pp. 70
.
External Links:
Document
,
2105.02676
Cited by:
§VI.1
.
K. Boone, G. Aldering, P. Antilogus, C. Aragon, S. Bailey, C. Baltay, S. Bongard, C. Buton, Y. Copin, S. Dixon, D. Fouchez, E. Gangler, R. Gupta, B. Hayden, W. Hillebrandt, A. G. Kim, M. Kowalski, D. Küsters, P.-F. Léget, F. Mondon, J. Nordin, R. Pain, E. Pecontal, R. Pereira, S. Perlmutter, K. A. Ponder, D. Rabinowitz, M. Rigault, D. Rubin, K. Runge, C. Saunders, G. Smadja, N. Suzuki, C. Tao, S. Taubenberger, R. C. Thomas, and M. Vincenzi (2021b)
The Twins Embedding of Type Ia Supernovae. II. Improving Cosmological Distance Estimates
.
ApJ
912
(
1
),
pp. 71
.
External Links:
Document
,
2105.02204
Cited by:
§VI.1
.
D. Branch, L. C. Dang, N. Hall, W. Ketchum, M. Melakayil, J. Parrent, M. A. Troxel, D. Casebeer, D. J. Jeffery, and E. Baron (2006)
Comparative Direct Analysis of Type Ia Supernova Spectra. II. Maximum Light
.
PASP
118
(
842
),
pp. 560–571
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0601048
Cited by:
§IV.1
.
D. Brout, D. Scolnic, B. Popovic, A. G. Riess, A. Carr, J. Zuntz, R. Kessler, T. M. Davis, S. Hinton, D. Jones, W. D. Kenworthy, E. R. Peterson, K. Said, G. Taylor, N. Ali, P. Armstrong, P. Charvu, A. Dwomoh, C. Meldorf, A. Palmese, H. Qu, B. M. Rose, B. Sanchez, C. W. Stubbs, M. Vincenzi, C. M. Wood, P. J. Brown, R. Chen, K. Chambers, D. A. Coulter, M. Dai, G. Dimitriadis, A. V. Filippenko, R. J. Foley, S. W. Jha, L. Kelsey, R. P. Kirshner, A. Möller, J. Muir, S. Nadathur, Y. Pan, A. Rest, C. Rojas-Bravo, M. Sako, M. R. Siebert, M. Smith, B. E. Stahl, and P. Wiseman (2022)
The Pantheon+ Analysis: Cosmological Constraints
.
ApJ
938
(
2
),
pp. 110
.
External Links:
Document
,
2202.04077
Cited by:
§I.2
,
§III.2.2
,
§V.3
.
C. R. Burns, M. Stritzinger, M. M. Phillips, S. Kattner, S. E. Persson, B. F. Madore, W. L. Freedman, L. Boldt, A. Campillay, C. Contreras, G. Folatelli, S. Gonzalez, W. Krzeminski, N. Morrell, F. Salgado, and N. B. Suntzeff (2011)
The Carnegie Supernova Project: Light-curve Fitting with SNooPy
.
AJ
141
(
1
),
pp. 19
.
External Links:
Document
,
1010.4040
Cited by:
§I.1
.
J. A. Cardelli, G. C. Clayton, and J. S. Mathis (1989)
The Relationship between Infrared, Optical, and Ultraviolet Extinction
.
ApJ
345
,
pp. 245
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§III.2.1
.
M. Chevallier and D. Polarski (2001)
Accelerating Universes with Scaling Dark Matter
.
International Journal of Modern Physics D
10
(
2
),
pp. 213–223
.
External Links:
Document
,
gr-qc/0009008
Cited by:
§I.1
.
R. S. de Jong, O. Agertz, A. A. Berbel, J. Aird, D. A. Alexander, A. Amarsi, F. Anders, R. Andrae, B. Ansarinejad, W. Ansorge, P. Antilogus, H. Anwand-Heerwart, A. Arentsen, A. Arnadottir, M. Asplund, M. Auger, N. Azais, D. Baade, G. Baker, S. Baker, E. Balbinot, I. K. Baldry, M. Banerji, S. Barden, P. Barklem, E. Barthélémy-Mazot, C. Battistini, S. Bauer, C. P. M. Bell, O. Bellido-Tirado, S. Bellstedt, V. Belokurov, T. Bensby, M. Bergemann, J. M. Bestenlehner, R. Bielby, M. Bilicki, C. Blake, J. Bland-Hawthorn, C. Boeche, W. Boland, T. Boller, S. Bongard, A. Bongiorno, P. Bonifacio, D. Boudon, D. Brooks, M. J. I. Brown, R. Brown, M. Brüggen, J. Brynnel, J. Brzeski, T. Buchert, P. Buschkamp, E. Caffau, P. Caillier, J. Carrick, L. Casagrande, S. Case, A. Casey, I. Cesarini, G. Cescutti, D. Chapuis, C. Chiappini, M. Childress, N. Christlieb, R. Church, M.-R. L. Cioni, M. Cluver, M. Colless, T. Collett, J. Comparat, A. Cooper, W. Couch, F. Courbin, S. Croom, D. Croton, E. Daguisé, G. Dalton, L. J. M. Davies, T. Davis, P. de Laverny, A. Deason, F. Dionies, K. Disseau, P. Doel, D. Döscher, S. P. Driver, T. Dwelly, D. Eckert, A. Edge, B. Edvardsson, D. E. Youssoufi, A. Elhaddad, H. Enke, G. Erfanianfar, T. Farrell, T. Fechner, C. Feiz, S. Feltzing, I. Ferreras, D. Feuerstein, D. Feuillet, A. Finoguenov, D. Ford, S. Fotopoulou, M. Fouesneau, C. Frenk, S. Frey, W. Gaessler, S. Geier, N. Gentile Fusillo, O. Gerhard, T. Giannantonio, D. Giannone, B. Gibson, P. Gillingham, C. González-Fernández, E. Gonzalez-Solares, S. Gottloeber, A. Gould, E. K. Grebel, A. Gueguen, G. Guiglion, M. Haehnelt, T. Hahn, C. J. Hansen, H. Hartman, K. Hauptner, K. Hawkins, D. Haynes, R. Haynes, U. Heiter, A. Helmi, C. H. Aguayo, P. Hewett, S. Hinton, D. Hobbs, S. Hoenig, D. Hofman, I. Hook, J. Hopgood, A. Hopkins, A. Hourihane, L. Howes, C. Howlett, T. Huet, M. Irwin, O. Iwert, P. Jablonka, T. Jahn, K. Jahnke, A. Jarno, S. Jin, P. Jofre, D. Johl, D. Jones, H. Jönsson, C. Jordan, I. Karovicova, A. Khalatyan, A. Kelz, R. Kennicutt, D. King, F. Kitaura, J. Klar, U. Klauser, J.-P. Kneib, A. Koch, S. Koposov, G. Kordopatis, A. Korn, J. Kosmalski, R. Kotak, M. Kovalev, K. Kreckel, Y. Kripak, M. Krumpe, K. Kuijken, A. Kunder, I. Kushniruk, M. I. Lam, G. Lamer, F. Laurent, J. Lawrence, M. Lehmitz, B. Lemasle, J. Lewis, B. Li, C. Lidman, K. Lind, J. Liske, J.-L. Lizon, J. Loveday, H.-G. Ludwig, R. M. McDermid, K. Maguire, V. Mainieri, S. Mali, and H. Mandel (2019)
4MOST: Project overview and information for the First Call for Proposals
.
The Messenger
175
,
pp. 3–11
.
External Links:
Document
,
1903.02464
Cited by:
§I.4
.
K. M. de Soto, V. A. Villar, E. Berger, S. Gomez, G. Hosseinzadeh, D. Branton, S. Campos, M. DeLucchi, J. Kubica, O. Lynn, K. Malanchev, and A. I. Malz (2024)
Superphot+: Real-time Fitting and Classification of Supernova Light Curves
.
ApJ
974
(
2
),
pp. 169
.
External Links:
Document
,
2403.07975
Cited by:
§IV.2.1
.
DES Collaboration, T. M. C. Abbott, M. Acevedo, M. Aguena, A. Alarcon, S. Allam, O. Alves, A. Amon, F. Andrade-Oliveira, J. Annis, P. Armstrong, J. Asorey, S. Avila, D. Bacon, B. A. Bassett, K. Bechtol, P. H. Bernardinelli, G. M. Bernstein, E. Bertin, J. Blazek, S. Bocquet, D. Brooks, D. Brout, E. Buckley-Geer, D. L. Burke, H. Camacho, R. Camilleri, A. Campos, A. Carnero Rosell, D. Carollo, A. Carr, J. Carretero, F. J. Castander, R. Cawthon, C. Chang, R. Chen, A. Choi, C. Conselice, M. Costanzi, L. N. da Costa, M. Crocce, T. M. Davis, D. L. DePoy, S. Desai, H. T. Diehl, M. Dixon, S. Dodelson, P. Doel, C. Doux, A. Drlica-Wagner, J. Elvin-Poole, S. Everett, I. Ferrero, A. Ferté, B. Flaugher, R. J. Foley, P. Fosalba, D. Friedel, J. Frieman, C. Frohmaier, L. Galbany, J. García-Bellido, M. Gatti, E. Gaztanaga, G. Giannini, K. Glazebrook, O. Graur, D. Gruen, R. A. Gruendl, G. Gutierrez, W. G. Hartley, K. Herner, S. R. Hinton, D. L. Hollowood, K. Honscheid, D. Huterer, B. Jain, D. J. James, N. Jeffrey, E. Kasai, L. Kelsey, S. Kent, R. Kessler, A. G. Kim, R. P. Kirshner, E. Kovacs, K. Kuehn, O. Lahav, J. Lee, S. Lee, G. F. Lewis, T. S. Li, C. Lidman, H. Lin, U. Malik, J. L. Marshall, P. Martini, J. Mena-Fernández, F. Menanteau, R. Miquel, J. J. Mohr, J. Mould, J. Muir, A. Möller, E. Neilsen, R. C. Nichol, P. Nugent, R. L. C. Ogando, A. Palmese, Y.-C. Pan, M. Paterno, W. J. Percival, M. E. S. Pereira, A. Pieres, A. A. P. Malagón, B. Popovic, A. Porredon, J. Prat, H. Qu, M. Raveri, M. Rodríguez-Monroy, A. K. Romer, A. Roodman, B. Rose, M. Sako, E. Sanchez, D. Sanchez Cid, M. Schubnell, D. Scolnic, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, P. Shah, J. Allyn. Smith, M. Smith, M. Soares-Santos, E. Suchyta, M. Sullivan, N. Suntzeff, M. E. C. Swanson, B. O. Sánchez, G. Tarle, G. Taylor, D. Thomas, C. To, M. Toy, M. A. Troxel, B. E. Tucker, D. L. Tucker, S. A. Uddin, M. Vincenzi, A. R. Walker, N. Weaverdyck, R. H. Wechsler, J. Weller, W. Wester, P. Wiseman, M. Yamamoto, F. Yuan, B. Zhang, and Y. Zhang (2024)
The Dark Energy Survey: Cosmology Results with
∼
\sim
1500 New High-redshift Type Ia Supernovae Using the Full 5 yr Data Set
.
ApJ
973
(
1
),
pp. L14
.
External Links:
Document
,
2401.02929
Cited by:
§I.2
,
§II.2
,
§V.3
.
DESI Collaboration, A. Aghamousa, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, L. E. Allen, C. Allende Prieto, J. Annis, S. Bailey, C. Balland, O. Ballester, C. Baltay, L. Beaufore, C. Bebek, T. C. Beers, E. F. Bell, J. L. Bernal, R. Besuner, F. Beutler, C. Blake, H. Bleuler, M. Blomqvist, R. Blum, A. S. Bolton, C. Briceno, D. Brooks, J. R. Brownstein, E. Buckley-Geer, A. Burden, E. Burtin, N. G. Busca, R. N. Cahn, Y. Cai, L. Cardiel-Sas, R. G. Carlberg, P. Carton, R. Casas, F. J. Castander, J. L. Cervantes-Cota, T. M. Claybaugh, M. Close, C. T. Coker, S. Cole, J. Comparat, A. P. Cooper, M. -C. Cousinou, M. Crocce, J. Cuby, D. P. Cunningham, T. M. Davis, K. S. Dawson, A. de la Macorra, J. De Vicente, T. Delubac, M. Derwent, A. Dey, G. Dhungana, Z. Ding, P. Doel, Y. T. Duan, A. Ealet, J. Edelstein, S. Eftekharzadeh, D. J. Eisenstein, A. Elliott, S. Escoffier, M. Evatt, P. Fagrelius, X. Fan, K. Fanning, A. Farahi, J. Farihi, G. Favole, Y. Feng, E. Fernandez, J. R. Findlay, D. P. Finkbeiner, M. J. Fitzpatrick, B. Flaugher, S. Flender, A. Font-Ribera, J. E. Forero-Romero, P. Fosalba, C. S. Frenk, M. Fumagalli, B. T. Gaensicke, G. Gallo, J. Garcia-Bellido, E. Gaztanaga, N. Pietro Gentile Fusillo, T. Gerard, I. Gershkovich, T. Giannantonio, D. Gillet, G. Gonzalez-de-Rivera, V. Gonzalez-Perez, S. Gott, O. Graur, G. Gutierrez, J. Guy, S. Habib, H. Heetderks, I. Heetderks, K. Heitmann, W. A. Hellwing, D. A. Herrera, S. Ho, S. Holland, K. Honscheid, E. Huff, T. A. Hutchinson, D. Huterer, H. S. Hwang, J. M. Illa Laguna, Y. Ishikawa, D. Jacobs, N. Jeffrey, P. Jelinsky, E. Jennings, L. Jiang, J. Jimenez, J. Johnson, R. Joyce, E. Jullo, S. Juneau, S. Kama, A. Karcher, S. Karkar, R. Kehoe, N. Kennamer, S. Kent, M. Kilbinger, A. G. Kim, D. Kirkby, T. Kisner, E. Kitanidis, J. Kneib, S. Koposov, E. Kovacs, K. Koyama, A. Kremin, R. Kron, L. Kronig, A. Kueter-Young, C. G. Lacey, R. Lafever, O. Lahav, A. Lambert, M. Lampton, M. Landriau, D. Lang, T. R. Lauer, J. Le Goff, L. Le Guillou, A. Le Van Suu, J. H. Lee, S. Lee, D. Leitner, M. Lesser, M. E. Levi, B. L’Huillier, B. Li, M. Liang, H. Lin, E. Linder, S. R. Loebman, Z. Lukić, J. Ma, N. MacCrann, C. Magneville, L. Makarem, M. Manera, C. J. Manser, R. Marshall, P. Martini, R. Massey, T. Matheson, J. McCauley, P. McDonald, I. D. McGreer, A. Meisner, N. Metcalfe, T. N. Miller, R. Miquel, J. Moustakas, A. Myers, M. Naik, J. A. Newman, R. C. Nichol, A. Nicola, L. Nicolati da Costa, J. Nie, G. Niz, P. Norberg, B. Nord, D. Norman, P. Nugent, T. O’Brien, M. Oh, and K. A. G. Olsen (2016)
The DESI Experiment Part I: Science,Targeting, and Survey Design
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:1611.00036
.
External Links:
Document
,
1611.00036
Cited by:
§I.4
,
§I
,
§IV
.
G. Efstathiou (2025)
Evolving dark energy or supernovae systematics?
.
MNRAS
538
(
2
),
pp. 875–882
.
External Links:
Document
,
2408.07175
Cited by:
§V.3
.
Euclid Collaboration, Y. Mellier, Abdurro’uf, J. A. Acevedo Barroso, A. Achúcarro, J. Adamek, R. Adam, G. E. Addison, N. Aghanim, M. Aguena, V. Ajani, Y. Akrami, A. Al-Bahlawan, A. Alavi, I. S. Albuquerque, G. Alestas, G. Alguero, A. Allaoui, S. W. Allen, V. Allevato, A. V. Alonso-Tetilla, B. Altieri, A. Alvarez-Candal, S. Alvi, A. Amara, L. Amendola, J. Amiaux, I. T. Andika, S. Andreon, A. Andrews, G. Angora, R. E. Angulo, F. Annibali, A. Anselmi, S. Anselmi, S. Arcari, M. Archidiacono, G. Aricò, M. Arnaud, S. Arnouts, M. Asgari, J. Asorey, L. Atayde, H. Atek, F. Atrio-Barandela, M. Aubert, E. Aubourg, T. Auphan, N. Auricchio, B. Aussel, H. Aussel, P. P. Avelino, A. Avgoustidis, S. Avila, S. Awan, R. Azzollini, C. Baccigalupi, E. Bachelet, D. Bacon, M. Baes, M. B. Bagley, B. Bahr-Kalus, A. Balaguera-Antolinez, E. Balbinot, M. Balcells, M. Baldi, I. Baldry, A. Balestra, M. Ballardini, O. Ballester, M. Balogh, E. Bañados, R. Barbier, S. Bardelli, M. Baron, T. Barreiro, R. Barrena, J.-C. Barriere, B. J. Barros, A. Barthelemy, N. Bartolo, A. Basset, P. Battaglia, A. J. Battisti, C. M. Baugh, L. Baumont, L. Bazzanini, J.-P. Beaulieu, V. Beckmann, A. N. Belikov, J. Bel, F. Bellagamba, M. Bella, E. Bellini, K. Benabed, R. Bender, G. Benevento, C. L. Bennett, K. Benson, P. Bergamini, J. R. Bermejo-Climent, F. Bernardeau, D. Bertacca, M. Berthe, J. Berthier, M. Bethermin, F. Beutler, C. Bevillon, S. Bhargava, R. Bhatawdekar, D. Bianchi, L. Bisigello, A. Biviano, R. P. Blake, A. Blanchard, J. Blazek, L. Blot, A. Bosco, C. Bodendorf, T. Boenke, H. Böhringer, P. Boldrini, M. Bolzonella, A. Bonchi, M. Bonici, D. Bonino, L. Bonino, C. Bonvin, W. Bon, J. T. Booth, S. Borgani, A. S. Borlaff, E. Borsato, B. Bose, M. T. Botticella, A. Boucaud, F. Bouche, J. S. Boucher, D. Boutigny, T. Bouvard, R. Bouwens, H. Bouy, R. A. A. Bowler, V. Bozza, E. Bozzo, E. Branchini, G. Brando, S. Brau-Nogue, P. Brekke, M. N. Bremer, M. Brescia, M.-A. Breton, J. Brinchmann, T. Brinckmann, C. Brockley-Blatt, M. Brodwin, L. Brouard, M. L. Brown, S. Bruton, J. Bucko, H. Buddelmeijer, G. Buenadicha, F. Buitrago, P. Burger, C. Burigana, V. Busillo, D. Busonero, R. Cabanac, L. Cabayol-Garcia, M. S. Cagliari, A. Caillat, L. Caillat, M. Calabrese, A. Calabro, G. Calderone, F. Calura, B. Camacho Quevedo, S. Camera, L. Campos, G. Cañas-Herrera, G. P. Candini, M. Cantiello, V. Capobianco, E. Cappellaro, N. Cappelluti, A. Cappi, K. I. Caputi, C. Cara, C. Carbone, V. F. Cardone, E. Carella, R. G. Carlberg, M. Carle, L. Carminati, F. Caro, J. M. Carrasco, J. Carretero, P. Carrilho, J. Carron Duque, and B. Carry (2025)
Euclid: I. Overview of the Euclid mission
.
A&A
697
,
pp. A1
.
External Links:
Document
,
2405.13491
Cited by:
§I
.
H. K. Fakhouri, K. Boone, G. Aldering, P. Antilogus, C. Aragon, S. Bailey, C. Baltay, K. Barbary, D. Baugh, S. Bongard, C. Buton, J. Chen, M. Childress, N. Chotard, Y. Copin, P. Fagrelius, U. Feindt, M. Fleury, D. Fouchez, E. Gangler, B. Hayden, A. G. Kim, M. Kowalski, P.-F. Leget, S. Lombardo, J. Nordin, R. Pain, E. Pecontal, R. Pereira, S. Perlmutter, D. Rabinowitz, J. Ren, M. Rigault, D. Rubin, K. Runge, C. Saunders, R. Scalzo, G. Smadja, C. Sofiatti, M. Strovink, N. Suzuki, C. Tao, R. C. Thomas, B. A. Weaver, and T. Nearby Supernova Factory (2015)
Improving Cosmological Distance Measurements Using Twin Type Ia Supernovae
.
ApJ
815
(
1
),
pp. 58
.
External Links:
Document
,
1511.01102
Cited by:
§VI.1
.
A. V. Filippenko (1997)
Optical Spectra of Supernovae
.
ARA&A
35
,
pp. 309–355
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§I.1
,
§IV.1
.
R. A. Fisher (1922)
On the Mathematical Foundations of Theoretical Statistics
.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series A
222
,
pp. 309–368
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Appendix A
,
§II.1
.
C. Frohmaier, M. Sullivan, P. E. Nugent, M. Smith, G. Dimitriadis, J. S. Bloom, S. B. Cenko, M. M. Kasliwal, S. R. Kulkarni, K. Maguire, E. O. Ofek, D. Poznanski, and R. M. Quimby (2019)
The volumetric rate of normal type Ia supernovae in the local Universe discovered by the Palomar Transient Factory
.
MNRAS
486
(
2
),
pp. 2308–2320
.
External Links:
Document
,
1903.08580
Cited by:
Appendix C
.
C. Frohmaier, M. Vincenzi, M. Sullivan, S. F. Hönig, M. Smith, H. Addison, T. Collett, G. Dimitriadis, R. S. Ellis, P. Gandhi, O. Graur, I. Hook, L. Kelsey, Y.-L. Kim, C. Lidman, K. Maguire, L. Makrygianni, B. Martin, A. Möller, R. C. Nichol, M. Nicholl, P. Schady, B. D. Simmons, S. J. Smartt, E. Tempel, P. Wiseman, and the LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration (2025)
TiDES: The 4MOST Time Domain Extragalactic Survey
.
ApJ
992
(
1
),
pp. 158
.
External Links:
Document
,
2501.16311
Cited by:
§I.4
,
§IV.1.2
,
§IV.1
,
§IV.3
,
§IV.3
,
§VI.2.1
.
C. Ganot, Y. Copin, M. Rigault, G. Dimitriadis, A. Goobar, K. Maguire, J. Nordin, M. Smith, G. Aldering, C. Barjou-Delayre, M. Betoule, J. S. Bloom, U. Burgaz, L. Galbany, M. Ginolin, M. Graham, D. Hale, J. Johansson, M. M. Kasliwal, Y.-L. Kim, F. J. Masci, T. E. Müller-Bravo, S. Perlmutter, B. Popovic, J. N. Purdum, B. Rusholme, J. Sollerman, J. H. Terwel, and A. Townsend (2025)
ZTF-SEDm Type Ia supernova sample for Twins Embedding spectrophotometric standardisation
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2512.07696
.
External Links:
Document
,
2512.07696
Cited by:
§VI.1
,
§VI.1
.
M. Ginolin, M. Rigault, Y. Copin, B. Popovic, G. Dimitriadis, A. Goobar, J. Johansson, K. Maguire, J. Nordin, M. Smith, M. Aubert, C. Barjou-Delayre, U. Burgaz, B. Carreres, S. Dhawan, M. Deckers, F. Feinstein, D. Fouchez, L. Galbany, C. Ganot, T. de Jaeger, Y.-L. Kim, D. Kuhn, L. Lacroix, T. E. Müller-Bravo, P. Nugent, B. Racine, P. Rosnet, D. Rosselli, F. Ruppin, J. Sollerman, J. H. Terwel, A. Townsend, R. Dekany, M. Graham, M. Kasliwal, S. L. Groom, J. Purdum, B. Rusholme, and S. van der Walt (2025)
ZTF SN Ia DR2: Colour standardisation of type Ia supernovae and its dependence on the environment
.
A&A
694
,
pp. A4
.
External Links:
Document
,
2406.02072
Cited by:
§II.2
.
J. Guy, P. Astier, S. Baumont, D. Hardin, R. Pain, N. Regnault, S. Basa, R. G. Carlberg, A. Conley, S. Fabbro, D. Fouchez, I. M. Hook, D. A. Howell, K. Perrett, C. J. Pritchet, J. Rich, M. Sullivan, P. Antilogus, E. Aubourg, G. Bazin, J. Bronder, M. Filiol, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, P. Ripoche, and V. Ruhlmann-Kleider (2007)
SALT2: using distant supernovae to improve the use of type Ia supernovae as distance indicators
.
A&A
466
(
1
),
pp. 11–21
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0701828
Cited by:
§I.1
,
§III.1
,
§III.2.1
.
J. Guy, S. Bailey, A. Kremin, S. Alam, D. M. Alexander, C. Allende Prieto, S. BenZvi, A. S. Bolton, D. Brooks, E. Chaussidon, A. P. Cooper, K. Dawson, A. de la Macorra, A. Dey, B. Dey, G. Dhungana, D. J. Eisenstein, A. Font-Ribera, J. E. Forero-Romero, E. Gaztañaga, S. Gontcho A Gontcho, D. Green, K. Honscheid, M. Ishak, R. Kehoe, D. Kirkby, T. Kisner, S. E. Koposov, T. Lan, M. Landriau, L. Le Guillou, M. E. Levi, C. Magneville, C. J. Manser, P. Martini, A. M. Meisner, R. Miquel, J. Moustakas, A. D. Myers, J. A. Newman, J. Nie, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, W. J. Percival, C. Poppett, F. Prada, A. Raichoor, C. Ravoux, A. J. Ross, E. F. Schlafly, D. Schlegel, M. Schubnell, R. M. Sharples, G. Tarlé, B. A. Weaver, C. Yéche, R. Zhou, Z. Zhou, and H. Zou (2023)
The Spectroscopic Data Processing Pipeline for the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument
.
AJ
165
(
4
),
pp. 144
.
External Links:
Document
,
2209.14482
Cited by:
§VI.1
.
X. J. Hall, A. Palmese, S. BenZvi, J. Banovetz, B. O’Connor, L. Hu, E. Hammerstein, A. Amsellem, J. N. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Bailey, D. Bianchi, D. Brooks, T. Claybaugh, A. Cuceu, K. Dawson, A. de la Macorra, J. Della Costa, A. Dey, P. Doel, S. Ferraro, A. Font-Ribera, J. E. Forero-Romero, E. Gaztanaga, S. G. A. Gontcho, A. Xochitl Gonzalez-Morales, O. Graur, G. Gutierrez, M. Ishak, J. Jimenez, D. Joyce, S. Juneau, A. Kremin, O. Lahav, C. Lamman, M. Landriau, L. Le Guillou, A. Leauthaud, M. Levi, M. Manera, A. Meisner, R. Miquel, J. Moustakas, A. Myers, S. Nadathur, W. Percival, C. Poppett, I. Perez-Rafols, F. Prada, G. Rossi, E. Sanchez, E. Schlafly, D. Schlegel, M. Schubnell, D. Sprayberry, G. Tarle, B. A. Weaver, R. Zhou, and H. Zou (2026)
The DESI Transients Survey: Legacy Classifications and Methodology
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2601.12611
.
External Links:
Document
,
2601.12611
Cited by:
§IV.1.2
,
§IV.2.5
,
§IV
,
§V.1
,
footnote 3
.
C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman, S. J. van der Walt, R. Gommers, P. Virtanen, D. Cournapeau, E. Wieser, J. Taylor, S. Berg, N. J. Smith, R. Kern, M. Picus, S. Hoyer, M. H. van Kerkwijk, M. Brett, A. Haldane, J. F. del Río, M. Wiebe, P. Peterson, P. Gérard-Marchant, K. Sheppard, T. Reddy, W. Weckesser, H. Abbasi, C. Gohlke, and T. E. Oliphant (2020)
Array programming with NumPy
.
Nature
585
(
7825
),
pp. 357–362
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
Testing
Λ
\Lambda
CDM versus dynamical dark energy in one year:
A DESI spectroscopic follow-up program for Rubin supernovae
.
J. D. Hunter (2007)
Matplotlib: a 2d graphics environment
.
Computing in Science & Engineering
9
(
3
),
pp. 90–95
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Testing
Λ
\Lambda
CDM versus dynamical dark energy in one year:
A DESI spectroscopic follow-up program for Rubin supernovae
.
Ž. Ivezić, S. M. Kahn, J. A. Tyson, B. Abel, E. Acosta, R. Allsman, D. Alonso, Y. AlSayyad, S. F. Anderson, J. Andrew, J. R. P. Angel, G. Z. Angeli, R. Ansari, P. Antilogus, C. Araujo, R. Armstrong, K. T. Arndt, P. Astier, É. Aubourg, N. Auza, T. S. Axelrod, D. J. Bard, J. D. Barr, A. Barrau, J. G. Bartlett, A. E. Bauer, B. J. Bauman, S. Baumont, E. Bechtol, K. Bechtol, A. C. Becker, J. Becla, C. Beldica, S. Bellavia, F. B. Bianco, R. Biswas, G. Blanc, J. Blazek, R. D. Blandford, J. S. Bloom, J. Bogart, T. W. Bond, M. T. Booth, A. W. Borgland, K. Borne, J. F. Bosch, D. Boutigny, C. A. Brackett, A. Bradshaw, W. N. Brandt, M. E. Brown, J. S. Bullock, P. Burchat, D. L. Burke, G. Cagnoli, D. Calabrese, S. Callahan, A. L. Callen, J. L. Carlin, E. L. Carlson, S. Chandrasekharan, G. Charles-Emerson, S. Chesley, E. C. Cheu, H. Chiang, J. Chiang, C. Chirino, D. Chow, D. R. Ciardi, C. F. Claver, J. Cohen-Tanugi, J. J. Cockrum, R. Coles, A. J. Connolly, K. H. Cook, A. Cooray, K. R. Covey, C. Cribbs, W. Cui, R. Cutri, P. N. Daly, S. F. Daniel, F. Daruich, G. Daubard, G. Daues, W. Dawson, F. Delgado, A. Dellapenna, R. de Peyster, M. de Val-Borro, S. W. Digel, P. Doherty, R. Dubois, G. P. Dubois-Felsmann, J. Durech, F. Economou, T. Eifler, M. Eracleous, B. L. Emmons, A. Fausti Neto, H. Ferguson, E. Figueroa, M. Fisher-Levine, W. Focke, M. D. Foss, J. Frank, M. D. Freemon, E. Gangler, E. Gawiser, J. C. Geary, P. Gee, M. Geha, C. J. B. Gessner, R. R. Gibson, D. K. Gilmore, T. Glanzman, W. Glick, T. Goldina, D. A. Goldstein, I. Goodenow, M. L. Graham, W. J. Gressler, P. Gris, L. P. Guy, A. Guyonnet, G. Haller, R. Harris, P. A. Hascall, J. Haupt, F. Hernandez, S. Herrmann, E. Hileman, J. Hoblitt, J. A. Hodgson, C. Hogan, J. D. Howard, D. Huang, M. E. Huffer, P. Ingraham, W. R. Innes, S. H. Jacoby, B. Jain, F. Jammes, M. J. Jee, T. Jenness, G. Jernigan, D. Jevremović, K. Johns, A. S. Johnson, M. W. G. Johnson, R. L. Jones, C. Juramy-Gilles, M. Jurić, J. S. Kalirai, N. J. Kallivayalil, B. Kalmbach, J. P. Kantor, P. Karst, M. M. Kasliwal, H. Kelly, R. Kessler, V. Kinnison, D. Kirkby, L. Knox, I. V. Kotov, V. L. Krabbendam, K. S. Krughoff, P. Kubánek, J. Kuczewski, S. Kulkarni, J. Ku, N. R. Kurita, C. S. Lage, R. Lambert, T. Lange, J. B. Langton, L. Le Guillou, D. Levine, M. Liang, K. Lim, C. J. Lintott, K. E. Long, M. Lopez, P. J. Lotz, R. H. Lupton, N. B. Lust, L. A. MacArthur, A. Mahabal, R. Mandelbaum, T. W. Markiewicz, D. S. Marsh, P. J. Marshall, S. Marshall, M. May, R. McKercher, M. McQueen, J. Meyers, M. Migliore, M. Miller, and D. J. Mills (2019)
LSST: From Science Drivers to Reference Design and Anticipated Data Products
.
ApJ
873
(
2
),
pp. 111
.
External Links:
Document
,
0805.2366
Cited by:
§I.3
,
§I
.
P. L. Kelly, M. Hicken, D. L. Burke, K. S. Mandel, and R. P. Kirshner (2010)
Hubble Residuals of Nearby Type Ia Supernovae are Correlated with Host Galaxy Masses
.
ApJ
715
(
2
),
pp. 743–756
.
External Links:
Document
,
0912.0929
Cited by:
§VI.1
.
W. D. Kenworthy, D. O. Jones, M. Dai, R. Kessler, D. Scolnic, D. Brout, M. R. Siebert, J. D. R. Pierel, K. G. Dettman, G. Dimitriadis, R. J. Foley, S. W. Jha, Y.-C. Pan, A. Riess, S. Rodney, and C. Rojas-Bravo (2021)
SALT3: An Improved Type Ia Supernova Model for Measuring Cosmic Distances
.
ApJ
923
(
2
),
pp. 265
.
External Links:
Document
,
2104.07795
Cited by:
§B.1
,
§I.1
,
§III.1
,
§III.2.1
,
§III.2
.
R. Kessler, G. Narayan, A. Avelino, E. Bachelet, R. Biswas, P. J. Brown, D. F. Chernoff, A. J. Connolly, M. Dai, S. Daniel, R. Di Stefano, M. R. Drout, L. Galbany, S. González-Gaitán, M. L. Graham, R. Hložek, E. E. O. Ishida, J. Guillochon, S. W. Jha, D. O. Jones, K. S. Mandel, D. Muthukrishna, A. O’Grady, C. M. Peters, J. R. Pierel, K. A. Ponder, A. Prša, S. Rodney, V. A. Villar, LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration, and Transient and Variable Stars Science Collaboration (2019)
Models and Simulations for the Photometric LSST Astronomical Time Series Classification Challenge (PLAsTiCC)
.
PASP
131
(
1003
),
pp. 094501
.
External Links:
Document
,
1903.11756
Cited by:
Figure 6
.
R. Kessler and D. Scolnic (2017)
Correcting Type Ia Supernova Distances for Selection Biases and Contamination in Photometrically Identified Samples
.
ApJ
836
(
1
),
pp. 56
.
External Links:
Document
,
1610.04677
Cited by:
§I.2
.
R. Kessler, R. Hounsell, B. Joshi, D. Rubin, M. Sako, R. Chen, V. Miranda, and B. M. Rose (2025)
Cosmology Constraints from Type Ia Supernova Simulations of the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope Strategy Recommended by the High-Latitude Time Domain Survey Definition Committee
.
ApJ
993
(
1
),
pp. 116
.
External Links:
Document
,
2506.04402
Cited by:
footnote 2
.
A. G. Kim and R. Miquel (2006)
Optimal extraction of cosmological information from supernova data in the presence of calibration uncertainties
.
Astroparticle Physics
24
(
6
),
pp. 451–458
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0508252
Cited by:
§III.2.2
,
§V.3
.
T. Lan, R. Tojeiro, E. Armengaud, J. X. Prochaska, T. M. Davis, D. M. Alexander, A. Raichoor, R. Zhou, C. Yèche, C. Balland, S. BenZvi, A. Berti, R. Canning, A. Carr, H. Chittenden, S. Cole, M.-C. Cousinou, K. Dawson, B. Dey, K. Douglass, A. Edge, S. Escoffier, A. Glanville, S. G. A Gontcho, J. Guy, C. Hahn, C. Howlett, H. S. Hwang, L. Jiang, A. Kovács, M. Mezcua, S. Moore, S. Nadathur, M. Oh, D. Parkinson, A. Rocher, A. J. Ross, V. Ruhlmann-Kleider, C. G. Sabiu, K. Said, C. Saulder, D. Sierra-Porta, B. Weiner, J. Yu, P. Zarrouk, Y. Zhang, H. Zou, S. Ahlen, S. Bailey, D. Brooks, A. P. Cooper, A. de la Macorra, A. Dey, G. Dhungana, P. Doel, S. Eftekharzadeh, K. Fanning, A. Font-Ribera, L. Garrison, E. Gaztañaga, R. Kehoe, T. Kisner, A. Kremin, M. Landriau, L. Le Guillou, M. E. Levi, C. Magneville, A. M. Meisner, R. Miquel, J. Moustakas, A. D. Myers, J. A. Newman, J. D. Nie, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, W. J. Percival, C. Poppett, F. Prada, M. Schubnell, G. Tarlé, B. A. Weaver, K. Zhang, and Z. Zhou (2023)
The DESI Survey Validation: Results from Visual Inspection of Bright Galaxies, Luminous Red Galaxies, and Emission-line Galaxies
.
ApJ
943
(
1
),
pp. 68
.
External Links:
Document
,
2208.08516
Cited by:
§I.3
.
A. Leauthaud and A. Riess (2025)
Looking beyond lambda
.
Nature Astronomy
9
,
pp. 1123–1128
.
External Links:
Document
,
2509.00359
Cited by:
§I.4
.
B. Leistedt, M. R. Becker, H. Awan, E. Gawiser, Q. Hang, R. Hložek, S. W. Jha, R. L. Jones, A. Kannawadi, M. Lochner, R. Mandelbaum, J. A. Newman, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, H. V. Peiris, E. S. Rykoff, M. A. Troxel, and P. Yoachim (2025)
Uniform Rolling: An LSST Observing Cadence Offering Sufficient Survey Uniformity for Comprehensive Cosmological Analysis
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2512.16478
.
External Links:
Document
,
2512.16478
Cited by:
§III
.
E. V. Linder (2003)
Exploring the Expansion History of the Universe
.
Phys. Rev. Lett.
90
(
9
),
pp. 091301
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0208512
Cited by:
§I.1
.
M. Lochner, D. Scolnic, H. Almoubayyed, T. Anguita, H. Awan, E. Gawiser, S. G. A Gontcho, M. L. Graham, P. Gris, S. Huber, S. W. Jha, R. Lynne Jones, A. G. Kim, R. Mandelbaum, P. Marshall, T. Petrushevska, N. Regnault, C. N. Setzer, S. H. Suyu, P. Yoachim, R. Biswas, T. Blaineau, I. Hook, M. Moniez, E. Neilsen, H. Peiris, D. Rothchild, C. Stubbs, and LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration (2022)
The Impact of Observing Strategy on Cosmological Constraints with LSST
.
ApJS
259
(
2
),
pp. 58
.
External Links:
Document
,
2104.05676
Cited by:
§III
.
M. Lochner, D. M. Scolnic, H. Awan, N. Regnault, P. Gris, R. Mandelbaum, E. Gawiser, H. Almoubayyed, C. N. Setzer, S. Huber, M. L. Graham, R. Hložek, R. Biswas, T. Eifler, D. Rothchild, T. Allam, J. Blazek, C. Chang, T. Collett, A. Goobar, I. M. Hook, M. Jarvis, S. W. Jha, A. G. Kim, P. Marshall, J. D. McEwen, M. Moniez, J. A. Newman, H. V. Peiris, T. Petrushevska, J. Rhodes, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, A. Slosar, S. H. Suyu, J. A. Tyson, and P. Yoachim (2018)
Optimizing the LSST Observing Strategy for Dark Energy Science: DESC Recommendations for the Wide-Fast-Deep Survey
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:1812.00515
.
External Links:
Document
,
1812.00515
Cited by:
§III
,
§IV.2.3
.
K. Lodha, R. Calderon, W. L. Matthewson, A. Shafieloo, M. Ishak, J. Pan, C. Garcia-Quintero, D. Huterer, G. Valogiannis, L. A. Ureña-López, N. V. Kamble, D. Parkinson, A. G. Kim, G. B. Zhao, J. L. Cervantes-Cota, J. Rohlf, F. Lozano-Rodríguez, J. O. Román-Herrera, M. Abdul-Karim, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, O. Alves, U. Andrade, E. Armengaud, A. Aviles, J. Behera, S. BenZvi, D. Bianchi, A. Brodzeller, D. Brooks, E. Burtin, R. Canning, A. C. Rosell, L. Casas, F. J. Castander, M. Charles, E. Chaussidon, J. Chaves-Montero, D. Chebat, T. Claybaugh, S. Cole, A. Cuceu, K. S. Dawson, A. de la Macorra, A. de Mattia, N. Deiosso, R. Demina, A. Dey, B. Dey, Z. Ding, P. Doel, D. J. Eisenstein, W. Elbers, S. Ferraro, A. Font-Ribera, J. E. Forero-Romero, L. H. Garrison, E. Gaztañaga, H. Gil-Marín, S. G. A. Gontcho, A. X. Gonzalez-Morales, G. Gutierrez, J. Guy, C. Hahn, M. Herbold, H. K. Herrera-Alcantar, K. Honscheid, C. Howlett, S. Juneau, R. Kehoe, D. Kirkby, T. Kisner, A. Kremin, O. Lahav, C. Lamman, M. Landriau, L. Le Guillou, A. Leauthaud, M. E. Levi, Q. Li, C. Magneville, M. Manera, P. Martini, A. Meisner, J. Mena-Fernández, R. Miquel, J. Moustakas, D. M. Santos, A. Muñoz-Gutiérrez, A. D. Myers, S. Nadathur, G. Niz, H. E. Noriega, E. Paillas, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, W. J. Percival, M. M. Pieri, C. Poppett, F. Prada, A. Pérez-Fernández, I. Pérez-Ràfols, C. Ramírez-Pérez, M. Rashkovetskyi, C. Ravoux, A. J. Ross, G. Rossi, V. Ruhlmann-Kleider, L. Samushia, E. Sanchez, D. Schlegel, M. Schubnell, H. Seo, F. Sinigaglia, D. Sprayberry, T. Tan, G. Tarlé, P. Taylor, W. Turner, M. Vargas-Magaña, M. Walther, B. A. Weaver, M. Wolfson, C. Yèche, P. Zarrouk, R. Zhou, H. Zou, and DESI Collaboration (2025)
Extended dark energy analysis using DESI DR2 BAO measurements
.
Phys. Rev. D
112
(
8
),
pp. 083511
.
External Links:
Document
,
2503.14743
Cited by:
§I
,
footnote 8
.
LSST Science Collaboration, P. A. Abell, J. Allison, S. F. Anderson, J. R. Andrew, J. R. P. Angel, L. Armus, D. Arnett, S. J. Asztalos, T. S. Axelrod, S. Bailey, D. R. Ballantyne, J. R. Bankert, W. A. Barkhouse, J. D. Barr, L. F. Barrientos, A. J. Barth, J. G. Bartlett, A. C. Becker, J. Becla, T. C. Beers, J. P. Bernstein, R. Biswas, M. R. Blanton, J. S. Bloom, J. J. Bochanski, P. Boeshaar, K. D. Borne, M. Bradac, W. N. Brandt, C. R. Bridge, M. E. Brown, R. J. Brunner, J. S. Bullock, A. J. Burgasser, J. H. Burge, D. L. Burke, P. A. Cargile, S. Chandrasekharan, G. Chartas, S. R. Chesley, Y. Chu, D. Cinabro, M. W. Claire, C. F. Claver, D. Clowe, A. J. Connolly, K. H. Cook, J. Cooke, A. Cooray, K. R. Covey, C. S. Culliton, R. de Jong, W. H. de Vries, V. P. Debattista, F. Delgado, I. P. Dell’Antonio, S. Dhital, R. Di Stefano, M. Dickinson, B. Dilday, S. G. Djorgovski, G. Dobler, C. Donalek, G. Dubois-Felsmann, J. Durech, A. Eliasdottir, M. Eracleous, L. Eyer, E. E. Falco, X. Fan, C. D. Fassnacht, H. C. Ferguson, Y. R. Fernandez, B. D. Fields, D. Finkbeiner, E. E. Figueroa, D. B. Fox, H. Francke, J. S. Frank, J. Frieman, S. Fromenteau, M. Furqan, G. Galaz, A. Gal-Yam, P. Garnavich, E. Gawiser, J. Geary, P. Gee, R. R. Gibson, K. Gilmore, E. A. Grace, R. F. Green, W. J. Gressler, C. J. Grillmair, S. Habib, J. S. Haggerty, M. Hamuy, A. W. Harris, S. L. Hawley, A. F. Heavens, L. Hebb, T. J. Henry, E. Hileman, E. J. Hilton, K. Hoadley, J. B. Holberg, M. J. Holman, S. B. Howell, L. Infante, Z. Ivezic, S. H. Jacoby, B. Jain, R, Jedicke, M. J. Jee, J. Garrett Jernigan, S. W. Jha, K. V. Johnston, R. L. Jones, M. Juric, M. Kaasalainen, Styliani, Kafka, S. M. Kahn, N. A. Kaib, J. Kalirai, J. Kantor, M. M. Kasliwal, C. R. Keeton, R. Kessler, Z. Knezevic, A. Kowalski, V. L. Krabbendam, K. S. Krughoff, S. Kulkarni, S. Kuhlman, M. Lacy, S. Lepine, M. Liang, A. Lien, P. Lira, K. S. Long, S. Lorenz, J. M. Lotz, R. H. Lupton, J. Lutz, L. M. Macri, A. A. Mahabal, R. Mandelbaum, P. Marshall, M. May, P. M. McGehee, B. T. Meadows, A. Meert, A. Milani, C. J. Miller, M. Miller, D. Mills, D. Minniti, D. Monet, A. S. Mukadam, E. Nakar, D. R. Neill, J. A. Newman, S. Nikolaev, M. Nordby, P. O’Connor, M. Oguri, J. Oliver, S. S. Olivier, J. K. Olsen, K. Olsen, E. W. Olszewski, H. Oluseyi, N. D. Padilla, A. Parker, J. Pepper, J. R. Peterson, C. Petry, P. A. Pinto, J. L. Pizagno, B. Popescu, A. Prsa, V. Radcka, M. J. Raddick, A. Rasmussen, A. Rau, J. Rho, J. E. Rhoads, G. T. Richards, S. T. Ridgway, B. E. Robertson, R. Roskar, A. Saha, A. Sarajedini, E. Scannapieco, T. Schalk, R. Schindler, and S. Schmidt (2009)
LSST Science Book, Version 2.0
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:0912.0201
.
External Links:
Document
,
0912.0201
Cited by:
§I.3
,
§III.1
.
LSST Science Collaboration, P. Marshall, T. Anguita, F. B. Bianco, E. C. Bellm, N. Brandt, W. Clarkson, A. Connolly, E. Gawiser, Z. Ivezic, L. Jones, M. Lochner, M. B. Lund, A. Mahabal, D. Nidever, K. Olsen, S. Ridgway, J. Rhodes, O. Shemmer, D. Trilling, K. Vivas, L. Walkowicz, B. Willman, P. Yoachim, S. Anderson, P. Antilogus, R. Angus, I. Arcavi, H. Awan, R. Biswas, K. J. Bell, D. Bennett, C. Britt, D. Buzasi, D. I. Casetti-Dinescu, L. Chomiuk, C. Claver, K. Cook, J. Davenport, V. Debattista, S. Digel, Z. Doctor, R. E. Firth, R. Foley, W. Fong, L. Galbany, M. Giampapa, J. E. Gizis, M. L. Graham, C. Grillmair, P. Gris, Z. Haiman, P. Hartigan, S. Hawley, R. Hlozek, S. W. Jha, C. Johns-Krull, S. Kanbur, V. Kalogera, V. Kashyap, V. Kasliwal, R. Kessler, A. Kim, P. Kurczynski, O. Lahav, M. C. Liu, A. Malz, R. Margutti, T. Matheson, J. D. McEwen, P. McGehee, S. Meibom, J. Meyers, D. Monet, E. Neilsen, J. Newman, M. O’Dowd, H. V. Peiris, M. T. Penny, C. Peters, R. Poleski, K. Ponder, G. Richards, J. Rho, D. Rubin, S. Schmidt, R. L. Schuhmann, A. Shporer, C. Slater, N. Smith, M. Soares-Santos, K. Stassun, J. Strader, M. Strauss, R. Street, C. Stubbs, M. Sullivan, P. Szkody, V. Trimble, T. Tyson, M. de Val-Borro, S. Valenti, R. Wagoner, W. M. Wood-Vasey, and B. A. Zauderer (2017)
Science-Driven Optimization of the LSST Observing Strategy
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:1708.04058
.
External Links:
Document
,
1708.04058
Cited by:
§III
.
K. G. Malmquist (1925)
A contribution to the problem of determining the distribution in space of the stars
.
Meddelanden fran Lunds Astronomiska Observatorium Serie I
106
,
pp. 1–12
.
Cited by:
§I.2
,
§III.3
.
A. I. Malz, M. Dai, K. A. Ponder, E. E. O. Ishida, S. Gonzalez-Gaitain, R. Durgesh, A. Krone-Martins, R. S. de Souza, N. Kennamer, S. Sreejith, L. Galbany, LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration (DESC), and Cosmostatistics Initiative (COIN) (2025)
Are light curve classification metrics good proxies for SN Ia cosmological constraining power?
.
A&A
694
,
pp. A130
.
External Links:
Document
,
2305.14421
Cited by:
§I.3
.
A. A. Miller, N. S. Abrams, G. Aldering, S. Anand, C. R. Angus, I. Arcavi, C. Baltay, F. E. Bauer, D. Brethauer, J. S. Bloom, H. Bommireddy, M. Catelan, R. Chornock, P. Clark, T. E. Collett, G. Dimitriadis, S. Faris, F. Förster, A. Franckowiak, C. Frohmaier, L. Galbany, R. B. Galleguillos, A. Goobar, O. Graur, C. P. Gutiérrez, S. Hall, E. Hammerstein, K. R. Herner, I. M. Hook, M. J. Huston, J. Johansson, C. D. Kilpatrick, A. G. Kim, R. A. Knop, M. P. Kowalski, L. A. Kwok, N. LeBaron, K. W. Lin, C. Liu, J. R. Lu, W. Lu, R. Lunnan, K. Maguire, L. Makrygianni, R. Margutti, D. Maoz, P. M. Veres, T. Moore, A. J. Nayana, M. Nicholl, J. Nordin, S. R. Oates, G. Pignata, A. Polin, D. Poznanski, J. L. Prieto, D. L. Rabinowitz, N. Rehemtulla, M. Rigault, D. Ryczanowski, N. Sarin, S. Schulze, V. G. Shah, X. Sheng, S. P. R. Shilling, B. D. Simmons, A. Singh, G. P. Smith, M. Smith, J. Sollerman, M. T. Soumagnac, C. W. Stubbs, M. Sullivan, A. Suresh, B. Trakhtenbrot, C. Ward, E. Wiston, H. Xiong, Y. Yao, and P. E. Nugent (2025)
The La Silla Schmidt Southern Survey
.
PASP
137
(
9
),
pp. 094204
.
External Links:
Document
,
2503.14579
Cited by:
§II.2
.
A. Mitra, R. Kessler, R. C. Chen, A. Gagliano, M. Grayling, S. More, G. Narayan, H. Qu, S. Raghunathan, A. I. Malz, M. Lochner, and The LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration (2025)
A Fully Photometric Approach to Type Ia Supernova Cosmology in the LSST Era: Host Galaxy Redshifts and Supernova Classification
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2512.06319
.
External Links:
2512.06319
Cited by:
§I.3
,
§I.3
,
§I.3
.
A. Mitra, R. Kessler, S. More, R. Hlozek, and LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration (2023)
Using Host Galaxy Photometric Redshifts to Improve Cosmological Constraints with Type Ia Supernovae in the LSST Era
.
ApJ
944
(
2
),
pp. 212
.
External Links:
Document
,
2210.07560
Cited by:
footnote 2
.
A. Möller, M. Smith, M. Sako, M. Sullivan, M. Vincenzi, P. Wiseman, P. Armstrong, J. Asorey, D. Brout, D. Carollo, T. M. Davis, C. Frohmaier, L. Galbany, K. Glazebrook, L. Kelsey, R. Kessler, G. F. Lewis, C. Lidman, U. Malik, R. C. Nichol, D. Scolnic, B. E. Tucker, T. M. C. Abbott, M. Aguena, S. Allam, J. Annis, E. Bertin, S. Bocquet, D. Brooks, D. L. Burke, A. Carnero Rosell, M. Carrasco Kind, J. Carretero, F. J. Castander, C. Conselice, M. Costanzi, M. Crocce, L. N. da Costa, J. De Vicente, S. Desai, H. T. Diehl, P. Doel, S. Everett, I. Ferrero, D. A. Finley, B. Flaugher, D. Friedel, J. Frieman, J. García-Bellido, D. W. Gerdes, D. Gruen, R. A. Gruendl, J. Gschwend, G. Gutierrez, K. Herner, S. R. Hinton, D. L. Hollowood, K. Honscheid, D. J. James, K. Kuehn, N. Kuropatkin, O. Lahav, M. March, J. L. Marshall, F. Menanteau, R. Miquel, R. Morgan, A. Palmese, F. Paz-Chinchón, A. Pieres, A. A. Plazas Malagón, A. K. Romer, A. Roodman, E. Sanchez, V. Scarpine, M. Schubnell, S. Serrano, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, E. Suchyta, G. Tarle, D. Thomas, C. To, and T. N. Varga (2022)
The dark energy survey 5-yr photometrically identified type Ia supernovae
.
MNRAS
514
(
4
),
pp. 5159–5177
.
External Links:
Document
,
2201.11142
Cited by:
§IV.2.1
.
J. Nordin, G. Aldering, P. Antilogus, C. Aragon, S. Bailey, C. Baltay, K. Barbary, S. Bongard, K. Boone, V. Brinnel, C. Buton, M. Childress, N. Chotard, Y. Copin, S. Dixon, P. Fagrelius, U. Feindt, D. Fouchez, E. Gangler, B. Hayden, W. Hillebrandt, A. Kim, M. Kowalski, D. Kuesters, P.-F. Leget, S. Lombardo, Q. Lin, R. Pain, E. Pecontal, R. Pereira, S. Perlmutter, D. Rabinowitz, M. Rigault, K. Runge, D. Rubin, C. Saunders, G. Smadja, C. Sofiatti, N. Suzuki, S. Taubenberger, C. Tao, R. C. Thomas, and Nearby Supernova Factory (2018)
Understanding type Ia supernovae through their U-band spectra
.
A&A
614
,
pp. A71
.
External Links:
Document
,
1801.01834
Cited by:
§III.1
.
D. A. Perley, C. Fremling, J. Sollerman, A. A. Miller, A. S. Dahiwale, Y. Sharma, E. C. Bellm, R. Biswas, T. G. Brink, R. J. Bruch, K. De, R. Dekany, A. J. Drake, D. A. Duev, A. V. Filippenko, A. Gal-Yam, A. Goobar, M. J. Graham, M. L. Graham, A. Y. Q. Ho, I. Irani, M. M. Kasliwal, Y. Kim, S. R. Kulkarni, A. Mahabal, F. J. Masci, S. Modak, J. D. Neill, J. Nordin, R. L. Riddle, M. T. Soumagnac, N. L. Strotjohann, S. Schulze, K. Taggart, A. Tzanidakis, R. S. Walters, and L. Yan (2020)
The Zwicky Transient Facility Bright Transient Survey. II. A Public Statistical Sample for Exploring Supernova Demographics
.
ApJ
904
(
1
),
pp. 35
.
External Links:
Document
,
2009.01242
Cited by:
§IV.2.1
.
S. Perlmutter, G. Aldering, G. Goldhaber, R. A. Knop, P. Nugent, P. G. Castro, S. Deustua, S. Fabbro, A. Goobar, D. E. Groom, I. M. Hook, A. G. Kim, M. Y. Kim, J. C. Lee, N. J. Nunes, R. Pain, C. R. Pennypacker, R. Quimby, C. Lidman, R. S. Ellis, M. Irwin, R. G. McMahon, P. Ruiz-Lapuente, N. Walton, B. Schaefer, B. J. Boyle, A. V. Filippenko, T. Matheson, A. S. Fruchter, N. Panagia, H. J. M. Newberg, W. J. Couch, and T. S. C. Project (1999)
Measurements of
Ω
\Omega
and
Λ
\Lambda
from 42 High-Redshift Supernovae
.
ApJ
517
(
2
),
pp. 565–586
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/9812133
Cited by:
§I
.
S. Perlmutter, S. Gabi, G. Goldhaber, A. Goobar, D. E. Groom, I. M. Hook, A. G. Kim, M. Y. Kim, J. C. Lee, R. Pain, C. R. Pennypacker, I. A. Small, R. S. Ellis, R. G. McMahon, B. J. Boyle, P. S. Bunclark, D. Carter, M. J. Irwin, K. Glazebrook, H. J. M. Newberg, A. V. Filippenko, T. Matheson, M. Dopita, and W. J. Couch (1997)
Measurements of the Cosmological Parameters
Ω
\Omega
and
Λ
\Lambda
from the First Seven Supernovae at z ¿= 0.35
.
ApJ
483
(
2
),
pp. 565–581
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/9608192
Cited by:
Appendix A
,
§I.1
.
M. M. Phillips (1993)
The Absolute Magnitudes of Type IA Supernovae
.
ApJ
413
,
pp. L105
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§I.1
.
J. D. R. Pierel, D. O. Jones, W. D. Kenworthy, M. Dai, R. Kessler, C. Ashall, A. Do, E. R. Peterson, B. J. Shappee, M. R. Siebert, T. Barna, T. G. Brink, J. Burke, A. Calamida, Y. Camacho-Neves, T. de Jaeger, A. V. Filippenko, R. J. Foley, L. Galbany, O. D. Fox, S. Gomez, D. Hiramatsu, R. Hounsell, D. A. Howell, S. W. Jha, L. A. Kwok, I. Pérez-Fournon, F. Poidevin, A. Rest, D. Rubin, D. M. Scolnic, R. Shirley, L. G. Strolger, S. Tinyanont, and Q. Wang (2022)
SALT3-NIR: Taking the Open-source Type Ia Supernova Model to Longer Wavelengths for Next-generation Cosmological Measurements
.
ApJ
939
(
1
),
pp. 11
.
External Links:
Document
,
2209.05594
Cited by:
§B.1
,
§III.2.1
,
§III.2.1
,
footnote 13
.
B. Popovic, W. D. Kenworthy, M. Ginolin, A. Goobar, P. Shah, B. M. Boyd, A. Do, D. Brout, D. Scolnic, M. Vincenzi, S. Dhawan, D. O. Jones, M. Smith, M. Rigault, B. Racine, E. E. Hayes, R. Chen, P. Wiseman, L. Galbany, M. Grayling, L. LaCroix, C. Barjou-Delayre, D. Kuhn, and C. Lemon (2025a)
A Reassessment of the Pantheon+ and DES 5YR Calibration Uncertainties: Dovekie
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2506.05471
.
External Links:
Document
,
2506.05471
Cited by:
§II.1
,
§V.3
,
§V.3
.
B. Popovic, P. Shah, W. D. Kenworthy, R. Kessler, T. M. Davis, A. Goobar, D. Scolnic, M. Vincenzi, P. Wiseman, R. Chen, E. Charleton, M. Acevedo, P. Armstrong, B. M. Boyd, D. Brout, R. Camilleri, J. Frieman, L. Galbany, M. Grayling, L. Kelsey, B. Rose, B. Sánchez, J. Lee, A. Möller, M. Smith, M. Sullivan, N. Shiamtanis, A. Alarcon, S. S. Allam, F. Andrade-Oliveira, S. Avila, D. Bacon, J. Blazek, S. Bocquet, D. Brooks, D. L. Burke, A. Carnero Rosell, J. Carretero, R. Cawthon, L. N. da Costa, M. E. da Silva Pereira, H. T. Diehl, S. Dodelson, P. Doel, S. Everett, C. Frohmaier, J. García-Bellido, D. Gruen, G. Gutierrez, K. Herner, S. R. Hinton, D. L. Hollowood, K. Honscheid, D. Huterer, D. J. James, N. Jeffrey, K. Kuehn, O. Lahav, S. Lee, C. Lidman, J. L. Marshall, J. Mena-Fernández, F. Menanteau, R. Miquel, J. Muir, J. Myles, R. L. C. Ogando, M. Paterno, A. A. Plazas Malagón, A. Porredon, J. Prat, R. C. Nichol, A. K. Romer, A. Roodman, E. Sanchez, D. Sanchez Cid, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, E. Suchyta, M. E. C. Swanson, C. To, D. L. Tucker, A. R. Walker, and N. Weaverdyck (2025b)
The Dark Energy Survey Supernova Program: A Reanalysis Of Cosmology Results And Evidence For Evolving Dark Energy With An Updated Type Ia Supernova Calibration
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2511.07517
.
External Links:
Document
,
2511.07517
Cited by:
§I.2
,
§III.2.2
,
§V.3
.
C. Poppett, L. Tyas, J. Aguilar, C. Bebek, D. Bramall, T. Claybaugh, J. Edelstein, P. Fagrelius, H. Heetderks, P. Jelinsky, S. Jelinsky, R. Lafever, A. Lambert, M. Lampton, M. E. Levi, P. Martini, C. Rockosi, J. Schmoll, R. M. Sharples, M. Sirk, E. Wishnow, J. Yu, S. Ahlen, A. Bault, S. BenZvi, D. Brooks, S. Cole, A. de la Macorra, A. Dey, P. Doel, K. Fanning, A. Font-Ribera, J. E. Forero-Romero, E. Gaztañaga, S. Gontcho A Gontcho, A. X. Gonzalez-Morales, C. Hahn, K. Honscheid, J. Jimenez, S. Juneau, D. Kirkby, A. Kremin, M. Landriau, L. Le Guillou, M. Manera, A. Meisner, R. Miquel, J. Moustakas, E. Mueller, A. Muñoz-Gutiérrez, A. D. Myers, J. Nie, G. Niz, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, W. J. Percival, F. Prada, D. Rabinowitz, M. Rezaie, G. Rossi, E. Sanchez, E. F. Schlafly, D. Schlegel, M. Schubnell, H. Seo, D. Sprayberry, G. Tarlé, M. Vargas-Magaña, B. A. Weaver, and R. Zhou (2024)
Overview of the Fiber System for the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument
.
AJ
168
(
6
),
pp. 245
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§IV
.
H. Qu, M. Sako, M. Vincenzi, C. Sánchez, D. Brout, R. Kessler, R. Chen, T. Davis, L. Galbany, L. Kelsey, J. Lee, C. Lidman, B. Popovic, B. Rose, D. Scolnic, M. Smith, M. Sullivan, P. Wiseman, T. M. C. Abbott, M. Aguena, O. Alves, D. Bacon, E. Bertin, D. Brooks, D. L. Burke, A. Carnero Rosell, J. Carretero, L. N. da Costa, M. E. S. Pereira, H. T. Diehl, P. Doel, S. Everett, I. Ferrero, J. Frieman, J. García-Bellido, G. Giannini, D. Gruen, R. A. Gruendl, G. Gutierrez, S. R. Hinton, D. L. Hollowood, K. Honscheid, D. J. James, K. Kuehn, O. Lahav, J. L. Marshall, J. Mena-Fernández, F. Menanteau, R. Miquel, R. L. C. Ogando, A. Palmese, A. Pieres, A. A. Plazas-Malagón, M. Raveri, E. Sanchez, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, M. Soares-Santos, E. Suchyta, G. Tarle, N. Weaverdyck, and DES Collaboration (2024)
The Dark Energy Survey Supernova Program: Cosmological Biases from Host Galaxy Mismatch of Type Ia Supernovae
.
ApJ
964
(
2
),
pp. 134
.
External Links:
Document
,
2307.13696
Cited by:
§I.3
.
H. Qu and M. Sako (2022)
Photometric Classification of Early-time Supernova Light Curves with SCONE
.
AJ
163
(
2
),
pp. 57
.
External Links:
Document
,
2111.05539
Cited by:
§IV.2.1
.
D. Richardson, R. L. Jenkins, J. Wright, and L. Maddox (2014)
Absolute-magnitude Distributions of Supernovae
.
AJ
147
(
5
),
pp. 118
.
External Links:
Document
,
1403.5755
Cited by:
Appendix C
.
A. G. Riess, A. V. Filippenko, P. Challis, A. Clocchiatti, A. Diercks, P. M. Garnavich, R. L. Gilliland, C. J. Hogan, S. Jha, R. P. Kirshner, B. Leibundgut, M. M. Phillips, D. Reiss, B. P. Schmidt, R. A. Schommer, R. C. Smith, J. Spyromilio, C. Stubbs, N. B. Suntzeff, and J. Tonry (1998)
Observational Evidence from Supernovae for an Accelerating Universe and a Cosmological Constant
.
AJ
116
(
3
),
pp. 1009–1038
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/9805201
Cited by:
§I
.
M. Rigault, M. Smith, A. Goobar, K. Maguire, G. Dimitriadis, J. Johansson, J. Nordin, U. Burgaz, S. Dhawan, J. Sollerman, N. Regnault, M. Kowalski, P. Nugent, I. Andreoni, M. Amenouche, M. Aubert, C. Barjou-Delayre, J. Bautista, E. Bellm, M. Betoule, J. S. Bloom, B. Carreres, T. X. Chen, Y. Copin, M. Deckers, T. de Jaeger, F. Feinstein, D. Fouchez, C. Fremling, L. Galbany, M. Ginolin, M. Graham, S. L. Groom, L. Harvey, M. M. Kasliwal, W. D. Kenworthy, Y.-L. Kim, D. Kuhn, S. R. Kulkarni, L. Lacroix, R. R. Laher, F. J. Masci, T. E. Müller-Bravo, A. Miller, M. Osman, D. Perley, B. Popovic, J. Purdum, Y.-J. Qin, B. Racine, S. Reusch, R. Riddle, P. Rosnet, D. Rosselli, F. Ruppin, R. Senzel, B. Rusholme, T. Schweyer, J. H. Terwel, A. Townsend, A. Tzanidakis, A. Wold, and L. Yan (2025)
ZTF SN Ia DR2: Overview
.
A&A
694
,
pp. A1
.
External Links:
Document
,
2409.04346
Cited by:
§III.2.1
,
§IV.2.1
,
§V.3
.
S. A. Rodney, A. G. Riess, L. Strolger, T. Dahlen, O. Graur, S. Casertano, M. E. Dickinson, H. C. Ferguson, P. Garnavich, B. Hayden, S. W. Jha, D. O. Jones, R. P. Kirshner, A. M. Koekemoer, C. McCully, B. Mobasher, B. Patel, B. J. Weiner, S. B. Cenko, K. I. Clubb, M. Cooper, A. V. Filippenko, T. F. Frederiksen, J. Hjorth, B. Leibundgut, T. Matheson, H. Nayyeri, K. Penner, J. Trump, J. M. Silverman, V. U, K. Azalee Bostroem, P. Challis, A. Rajan, S. Wolff, S. M. Faber, N. A. Grogin, and D. Kocevski (2014)
Type Ia Supernova Rate Measurements to Redshift 2.5 from CANDELS: Searching for Prompt Explosions in the Early Universe
.
AJ
148
(
1
),
pp. 13
.
External Links:
Document
,
1401.7978
Cited by:
§B.1
,
§III.2
,
§IV.2.3
.
B. M. Rose, G. Aldering, M. Dai, S. Deustua, R. J. Foley, E. Gangler, Ph. Gris, I. M. Hook, R. Kessler, G. Narayan, P. Nugent, S. Perlmutter, K. A. Ponder, B. Racine, D. Rubin, B. O. Sánchez, D. M. Scolnic, W. M. Wood-Vasey, D. Brout, A. Cikota, D. Fouchez, P. M. Garnavich, R. Hounsell, M. Sako, C. Tao, S. W. Jha, D. O. Jones, L. Strolger, and H. Qu (2021)
Synergies between Vera C. Rubin Observatory, Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, and Euclid Mission: Constraining Dark Energy with Type Ia Supernovae
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2104.01199
.
External Links:
Document
,
2104.01199
Cited by:
§I.4
.
A. Roy, S. Feldman, P. Klupar, J. DiPalma, S. Perlmutter, E. S. Douglas, G. Aldering, G. Furesz, P. Ingraham, G. Stefansson, D. Kelly, F. Y. Yang, T. Wevers, N. Arulanantham, J. Lasker, M. Rigault, E. Schlawin, S. R. Zandbergen, S. P. Worden, R. Anche, H. Choi, I. J. M. Crossfield, K. Derby, J. Edelstein, M. Eiklenborg, S. Gezari, P. Giuliano, J. Hom, T. J. Hoyt, H. Kang, D. Kim, K. Kunnumkai, L. Lacroix, J. R. Males, T. J. Maccarone, K. Milani, T. N. Miller, K. L. Miller, P. Nicolas, A. Palmese, J. Pero, L. Pueyo, S. Rinaldi, D. J. Sand, C. Schneider, S. Sabhlok, A. Smith, I. I. Stefan, S. Kalyani Subramanian, K. Van Gorkom, A. F. Wong, J. Yoo, M. Abdullah Al Zaman, and the Lazuli Science Team (2026)
The Lazuli Space Observatory: Architecture & Capabilities
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2601.02556
.
External Links:
Document
,
2601.02556
Cited by:
§I
,
§VI.2.2
.
D. Rubin, G. Aldering, M. Betoule, A. Fruchter, X. Huang, A. G. Kim, C. Lidman, E. Linder, S. Perlmutter, P. Ruiz-Lapuente, and N. Suzuki (2025a)
Union through UNITY: Cosmology with 2000 SNe Using a Unified Bayesian Framework
.
ApJ
986
(
2
),
pp. 231
.
External Links:
Document
,
2311.12098
Cited by:
§B.2
,
§B.3
,
§D.1
,
Figure 1
,
§I.2
,
§I
,
§II.1
,
§II.2
,
§II.2
,
§III.2.1
,
§III.2.1
,
§III.2
,
§V.3
,
§V.3
.
D. Rubin, G. Aldering, A. Fruchter, L. Galbany, R. Hounsell, R. Kessler, S. Perlmutter, B. Rose, M. Sako, D. Scolnic, J. Truong, and the Roman Supernova Cosmology Project Infrastructure Team (2025b)
Fishing for the Optimal Roman High Latitude Time Domain Survey: Cosmological Constraints for 1,000 Possible Surveys
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2506.04327
.
External Links:
Document
,
2506.04327
Cited by:
§B.1
,
§II.1
,
§III.2.2
,
§III.2
,
§III.2
,
§III.2
,
§V.3
,
§VI.1
,
footnote 28
,
footnote 6
,
Testing
Λ
\Lambda
CDM versus dynamical dark energy in one year:
A DESI spectroscopic follow-up program for Rubin supernovae
.
D. Rubin, T. Hoyt, G. Aldering, and S. Perlmutter (2026)
Banana Split: Improved Cosmological Constraints with Two Light-Curve-Shape and Color Populations Using Union3.1+UNITY1.8
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2601.19854
.
External Links:
Document
,
2601.19854
Cited by:
footnote 14
.
E. F. Schlafly, D. Kirkby, D. J. Schlegel, A. D. Myers, A. Raichoor, K. Dawson, J. Aguilar, C. Allende Prieto, S. Bailey, S. BenZvi, J. Bermejo-Climent, D. Brooks, A. de la Macorra, A. Dey, P. Doel, K. Fanning, A. Font-Ribera, J. E. Forero-Romero, J. García-Bellido, S. Gontcho A Gontcho, J. Guy, C. Hahn, K. Honscheid, M. Ishak, S. Juneau, R. Kehoe, T. Kisner, A. Kremin, M. Landriau, D. A. Lang, J. Lasker, M. E. Levi, C. Magneville, C. J. Manser, P. Martini, A. M. Meisner, R. Miquel, J. Moustakas, J. A. Newman, J. Nie, Nathalie. Palanque-Delabrouille, W. J. Percival, C. Poppett, C. Rockosi, A. J. Ross, G. Rossi, G. Tarlé, B. A. Weaver, C. Yèche, R. Zhou, and DESI Collaboration (2023)
Survey Operations for the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument
.
AJ
166
(
6
),
pp. 259
.
External Links:
Document
,
2306.06309
Cited by:
§I.4
,
§IV
,
§IV
,
§VI.2.3
.
S. J. Schmidt, A. I. Malz, J. Y. H. Soo, I. A. Almosallam, M. Brescia, S. Cavuoti, J. Cohen-Tanugi, A. J. Connolly, J. DeRose, P. E. Freeman, M. L. Graham, K. G. Iyer, M. J. Jarvis, J. B. Kalmbach, E. Kovacs, A. B. Lee, G. Longo, C. B. Morrison, J. A. Newman, E. Nourbakhsh, E. Nuss, T. Pospisil, H. Tranin, R. H. Wechsler, R. Zhou, R. Izbicki, and LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration (2020)
Evaluation of probabilistic photometric redshift estimation approaches for The Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST)
.
MNRAS
499
(
2
),
pp. 1587–1606
.
External Links:
Document
,
2001.03621
Cited by:
§I.3
.
D. Shlivko and P. J. Steinhardt (2024)
Assessing observational constraints on dark energy
.
Physics Letters B
855
,
pp. 138826
.
External Links:
Document
,
2405.03933
Cited by:
§I
.
D. Spergel, N. Gehrels, C. Baltay, D. Bennett, J. Breckinridge, M. Donahue, A. Dressler, B. S. Gaudi, T. Greene, O. Guyon, C. Hirata, J. Kalirai, N. J. Kasdin, B. Macintosh, W. Moos, S. Perlmutter, M. Postman, B. Rauscher, J. Rhodes, Y. Wang, D. Weinberg, D. Benford, M. Hudson, W. -S. Jeong, Y. Mellier, W. Traub, T. Yamada, P. Capak, J. Colbert, D. Masters, M. Penny, D. Savransky, D. Stern, N. Zimmerman, R. Barry, L. Bartusek, K. Carpenter, E. Cheng, D. Content, F. Dekens, R. Demers, K. Grady, C. Jackson, G. Kuan, J. Kruk, M. Melton, B. Nemati, B. Parvin, I. Poberezhskiy, C. Peddie, J. Ruffa, J. K. Wallace, A. Whipple, E. Wollack, and F. Zhao (2015)
Wide-Field InfrarRed Survey Telescope-Astrophysics Focused Telescope Assets WFIRST-AFTA 2015 Report
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:1503.03757
.
External Links:
Document
,
1503.03757
Cited by:
§I
,
§VI.2.2
.
D. N. Spergel and G. D. Starkman (2002)
Using Supernovae to Determine the Equation of State of the Dark Energy: Is Shallow Better than Deep?
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. astro–ph/0204089
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0204089
Cited by:
§II.3
.
G. Stein, U. Seljak, V. Böhm, G. Aldering, P. Antilogus, C. Aragon, S. Bailey, C. Baltay, S. Bongard, K. Boone, C. Buton, Y. Copin, S. Dixon, D. Fouchez, E. Gangler, R. Gupta, B. Hayden, W. Hillebrandt, M. Karmen, A. G. Kim, M. Kowalski, D. Küsters, P.-F. Léget, F. Mondon, J. Nordin, R. Pain, E. Pecontal, R. Pereira, S. Perlmutter, K. A. Ponder, D. Rabinowitz, M. Rigault, D. Rubin, K. Runge, C. Saunders, G. Smadja, N. Suzuki, C. Tao, S. Taubenberger, R. C. Thomas, M. Vincenzi, and Nearby Supernova Factory (2022)
A Probabilistic Autoencoder for Type Ia Supernova Spectral Time Series
.
ApJ
935
(
1
),
pp. 5
.
External Links:
Document
,
2207.07645
Cited by:
§IV.1.1
,
§VI.1
.
L. Strolger, T. Dahlen, S. A. Rodney, O. Graur, A. G. Riess, C. McCully, S. Ravindranath, B. Mobasher, and A. K. Shahady (2015)
The Rate of Core Collapse Supernovae to Redshift 2.5 from the CANDELS and CLASH Supernova Surveys
.
ApJ
813
(
2
),
pp. 93
.
External Links:
Document
,
1509.06574
Cited by:
Appendix C
.
M. Sullivan, A. Conley, D. A. Howell, J. D. Neill, P. Astier, C. Balland, S. Basa, R. G. Carlberg, D. Fouchez, J. Guy, D. Hardin, I. M. Hook, R. Pain, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, K. M. Perrett, C. J. Pritchet, N. Regnault, J. Rich, V. Ruhlmann-Kleider, S. Baumont, E. Hsiao, T. Kronborg, C. Lidman, S. Perlmutter, and E. S. Walker (2010)
The dependence of Type Ia Supernovae luminosities on their host galaxies
.
MNRAS
406
(
2
),
pp. 782–802
.
External Links:
Document
,
1003.5119
Cited by:
§VI.1
.
The LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration, R. Mandelbaum, T. Eifler, R. Hložek, T. Collett, E. Gawiser, D. Scolnic, D. Alonso, H. Awan, R. Biswas, J. Blazek, P. Burchat, N. E. Chisari, I. Dell’Antonio, S. Digel, J. Frieman, D. A. Goldstein, I. Hook, Ž. Ivezić, S. M. Kahn, S. Kamath, D. Kirkby, T. Kitching, E. Krause, P. Leget, P. J. Marshall, J. Meyers, H. Miyatake, J. A. Newman, R. Nichol, E. Rykoff, F. J. Sanchez, A. Slosar, M. Sullivan, and M. A. Troxel (2018)
The LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration (DESC) Science Requirements Document
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:1809.01669
.
External Links:
Document
,
1809.01669
Cited by:
§I.3
,
§I.3
,
§V.3
.
R. Tripp (1998)
A two-parameter luminosity correction for Type IA supernovae
.
A&A
331
,
pp. 815–820
.
Cited by:
§D.1
,
§I.1
.
M. Vincenzi, M. Sullivan, A. Möller, P. Armstrong, B. A. Bassett, D. Brout, D. Carollo, A. Carr, T. M. Davis, C. Frohmaier, L. Galbany, K. Glazebrook, O. Graur, L. Kelsey, R. Kessler, E. Kovacs, G. F. Lewis, C. Lidman, U. Malik, R. C. Nichol, B. Popovic, M. Sako, D. Scolnic, M. Smith, G. Taylor, B. E. Tucker, P. Wiseman, M. Aguena, S. Allam, J. Annis, J. Asorey, D. Bacon, E. Bertin, D. Brooks, D. L. Burke, A. Carnero Rosell, J. Carretero, F. J. Castander, M. Costanzi, L. N. da Costa, M. E. S. Pereira, J. De Vicente, S. Desai, H. T. Diehl, P. Doel, S. Everett, I. Ferrero, B. Flaugher, P. Fosalba, J. Frieman, J. García-Bellido, D. W. Gerdes, D. Gruen, G. Gutierrez, S. R. Hinton, D. L. Hollowood, K. Honscheid, D. J. James, K. Kuehn, N. Kuropatkin, O. Lahav, T. S. Li, M. Lima, M. A. G. Maia, J. L. Marshall, R. Miquel, R. Morgan, R. L. C. Ogando, A. Palmese, F. Paz-Chinchón, A. Pieres, A. A. Plazas Malagón, K. Reil, A. Roodman, E. Sanchez, M. Schubnell, S. Serrano, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, E. Suchyta, G. Tarle, C. To, T. N. Varga, J. Weller, R. D. Wilkinson, and DES Collaboration (2023)
The Dark Energy Survey supernova program: cosmological biases from supernova photometric classification
.
MNRAS
518
(
1
),
pp. 1106–1127
.
External Links:
Document
,
2111.10382
Cited by:
§I.3
.
W. J. Wolf and J. Read (2025)
Navigating permanent underdetermination in dark energy and inflationary cosmology
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2501.13521
.
External Links:
Document
,
2501.13521
Cited by:
§I
.
Appendix A
Fisher matrix formalism
We use the Fisher information matrix
(Fisher,
1922
)
to estimate the Gaussian covariance of cosmological parameters
𝒑
\bm{p}
. It depends on the assumed Gaussian measurement uncertainties, given by a covariance matrix
𝒞
i
​
j
\mathcal{C}_{ij}
of the observations
𝑶
\bm{O}
, and the choice of the fiducial cosmology.
The Fisher matrix is
F
a
​
b
=
∑
i
,
j
∂
O
i
∂
p
a
|
fid
​
𝒞
i
​
j
−
1
​
∂
O
j
∂
p
b
|
fid
\displaystyle F_{ab}=\sum_{i,j}\frac{\partial O_{i}}{\partial p_{a}}\Bigr|_{\rm fid}\,\mathcal{C}_{ij}^{-1}\,\frac{\partial O_{j}}{\partial p_{b}}\Bigr|_{\rm fid}
(A1)
where the partial derivatives are evaluated at some chosen fiducial cosmology.
O
i
O_{i}
refers to any individual measurement of any observable (e.g. supernova magnitude, distance to last scattering, etc.). Practically, measurements of different cosmological observables (such as from the CMB, BAO, SNe) are uncorrelated, so their Fisher matrices can simply be combined additively.
The covariance of cosmological parameters from combining different cosmological probes is then the inverse of the combined Fisher matrix of these probes.
For supernovae, the observable is the distance modulus
μ
=
5
​
log
10
⁡
𝒟
L
​
(
z
|
w
0
,
w
a
,
Ω
M
)
+
ℳ
\displaystyle\mu=5\log_{10}\mathcal{D}_{L}(z|w_{0},w_{a},\Omega_{M})+\mathcal{M}
(A2)
where
𝒟
L
=
H
0
​
d
L
/
c
=
(
1
+
z
)
​
∫
0
z
d
​
z
′
E
​
(
z
′
)
\mathcal{D}_{L}=H_{0}d_{L}/c=(1+z)\int_{0}^{z}\frac{dz^{\prime}}{E(z^{\prime})}
is the dimensionless luminosity distance; and the dimensionless Hubble parameter for a flat universe is
E
​
(
z
)
=
H
​
(
z
)
H
0
=
Ω
m
​
(
1
+
z
)
3
+
(
1
−
Ω
m
)
​
(
1
+
z
)
3
​
(
1
+
w
0
+
w
a
)
​
e
−
3
​
w
a
​
z
1
+
z
.
E(z)=\frac{H(z)}{H_{0}}=\sqrt{\Omega_{m}(1+z)^{3}+(1-\Omega_{m})(1+z)^{3(1+w_{0}+w_{a})}e^{\frac{-3w_{a}z}{1+z}}}.
(A3)
For dark energy cosmology,
ℳ
\mathcal{M}
is commonly treated as a nuisance parameter, so dark energy measurements do not explicitly depend on
H
0
H_{0}
.
ℳ
\mathcal{M}
is typically treated as a nuisance parameter
(Perlmutter
et al.
,
1997
)
.
The corresponding 4
×
\times
4 Fisher matrix, where the rows and columns correspond to the information on the parameters
𝒑
=
{
w
0
,
w
a
,
Ω
M
,
ℳ
}
\bm{p}=\{w_{0},w_{a},\Omega_{M},\mathcal{M}\}
, is then given by
F
a
​
b
SN
=
∑
i
,
j
∂
μ
​
(
z
i
)
∂
p
a
|
fid
​
𝒞
−
1
​
(
z
i
,
z
j
)
​
∂
μ
​
(
z
j
)
∂
p
b
|
fid
\displaystyle F_{ab}^{\rm SN}=\sum_{i,j}\frac{\partial\mu(z_{i})}{\partial p_{a}}\Bigr|_{\rm fid}\,\mathcal{C}^{-1}(z_{i},z_{j})\,\frac{\partial\mu(z_{j})}{\partial p_{b}}\Bigr|_{\rm fid}
(A4)
where
𝒞
\mathcal{C}
is now the distance modulus covariance matrix with units
mag
2
\rm mag^{2}
.
A.1
Combining new SNe with existing data
When combining with measurements of Baryon Acoustic Oscillations (BAO) and the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB), we use the parameter covariance matrices released with DESI DR2
(Abdul Karim
et al.
,
2025
)
.
26
26
26
https://data.desi.lbl.gov/public/papers/y3/bao-cosmo-params/cobaya/base_w_wa/
When combining new SNe with BAO+CMB+Union3, we have to be a bit careful. Even though the parameter covariance matrix was obtained using Union3 data, the released covariance matrix does not contain information about
ℳ
\mathcal{M}
explicitly because it is marginalized over.
27
27
27
Since
ℳ
\mathcal{M}
appears as a linear term in
μ
\mu
, it can be analytically marginalized over in the likelihood. Typically, a Gaussian with zero mean and
σ
ℳ
→
∞
\sigma_{\mathcal{M}}\rightarrow\infty
is assumed in the process. However, the lack of
ℳ
\mathcal{M}
information leads to practical problems when adding supernovae in a very limited redshift range – no matter how precise these measurements are, they could not improve constraints on
w
0
−
w
a
w_{0}-w_{a}
in this scenario.
So when pre-processing like above,
ℳ
\mathcal{M}
is under-constrained. To alleviate this, we compute the Union3 Fisher matrix and insert its
ℳ
\mathcal{M}
-information into the Fisher matrix.
This somewhat artificial modification of the Fisher matrix has little impact on all relevant metrics. When inverting this Fisher matrix back to get a (now slightly modified) parameter covariance matrix, changes are small:
<
0.5
%
<0.5\%
in the Figure of Merit and distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM, and
<
1
%
<1\%
for all individual entries in the
w
0
,
w
a
,
Ω
M
w_{0},w_{a},\Omega_{M}
sub-covariance matrix.
A.2
Figure of Merit and distance from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM
One obtains the covariance matrix of cosmological parameters by inverting the combined Fisher matrix. The Figure of Merit as defined by the Dark Energy Task Force (DETF FoM,
Albrecht
et al.
2006
) is related to the inverse area of the
w
0
−
w
a
w_{0}-w_{a}
ellipse,
FoM
=
1
det
Cov
​
(
w
0
,
w
a
)
,
\displaystyle\mathrm{FoM}=\frac{1}{\sqrt{\det\mathrm{Cov}(w_{0},w_{a})}},
(A5)
and is commonly used as a measure of
w
0
−
w
a
w_{0}-w_{a}
constraints: The smaller the ellipse, the larger the FoM is, and the better the constraints.
While the covariance matrix of the observations is in principle cosmology-independent, the Fisher matrix (and thus the parameter covariance matrix) depends on the choice of the fiducial cosmology (see eq.
A4
). Typically, the same experiment will lead to tighter constraints (higher FoM) when assuming
Λ
\Lambda
CDM as one’s fiducial cosmology.
We compute the distance in
σ
\sigma
from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM (
w
0
=
−
1
w_{0}=-1
,
w
a
=
0
w_{a}=0
) via the Mahalanobis distance
σ
=
(
Δ
​
w
0
​
Δ
​
w
a
)
​
Cov
​
(
w
0
,
w
a
)
−
1
​
(
Δ
​
w
0
Δ
​
w
a
)
,
\sigma=\sqrt{\left(\Delta w_{0}\;\;\Delta w_{a}\right)\,\mathrm{Cov}(w_{0},w_{a})^{-1}\,\begin{pmatrix}\Delta w_{0}\\[2.0pt]
\Delta w_{a}\end{pmatrix}},
(A6)
where
Δ
​
w
0
\Delta w_{0}
and
Δ
​
w
a
\Delta w_{a}
are the deviations of the fiducial point from
Λ
\Lambda
CDM.
Appendix B
Simulations and systematics
B.1
Supernova generation and light curve simulation
Inside the duration and footprint of the simulated survey, redshifts and times at maximum light of supernovae are drawn based on volumetric rates in
Rodney
et al.
(
2014
)
.
Supernova redshifts are binned in bins of
0.05
0.05
width for
z
>
0.05
z>0.05
. The lowest redshift bin center is at
z
=
0.075
z=0.075
. SNe below
z
=
0.05
z=0.05
are not generated at all. This is inherited from
Rubin
et al.
(
2025b
)
, who made this choice since peculiar velocities due to bulk flows in the cosmic web have an especially significant impact on the measured distance moduli below this redshift, and peculiar velocities are not accounted for in the simulation. So including these SNe would lead to overly optimistic results.
For each supernova, SALT3
(Kenworthy
et al.
,
2021
; Pierel
et al.
,
2022
)
light-curve parameters are drawn, and
SNCosmo
(Barbary
et al.
,
2016
)
is used to generate supernova SEDs (spectral-energy distributions) based on SALT3-NIR
(Pierel
et al.
,
2022
)
from
−
15
-15
to
+
45
+45
days from maximum in the rest frame of the supernova. This information is then used to generate a pixelized image.
Given the input cadences and exposure times for each filter, measurements of fluxes and uncertainties of the light curve are generated from these simulated images. Figure
6
shows an example light curve.
B.2
Model fitting error
An important contribution to the total uncertainty comes from the supernova model. The model fits the measured light curves to standardize the supernovae. The quality of the fits can be influenced by the signal-to-noise ratios of individual measurements, but also uncertainties in the calibration of the instruments. Suboptimally calibrated models produce biased distance modulus predictions, which can then systematically affect the final cosmology results. The systematic uncertainty introduced by imperfect model fitting is a significant component in the total error budget
(Rubin
et al.
,
2025a
)
.
B.3
Fitting process and calculation of distance modulus covariance matrix
We use a unified Bayesian fitting framework similar to UNITY1.5
(Rubin
et al.
,
2025a
)
. We fit all cosmological parameters and nuisance parameters (like the previously mentioned calibration uncertainties) simultaneously. By solving for all parameters at the same time, we propagate the uncertainties from all sources into our final cosmology result.
Our approach is essentially to minimize a global
χ
2
\chi^{2}
χ
2
=
∑
i
=
1
N
SN
χ
i
,
data
2
+
χ
priors
2
\displaystyle\chi^{2}=\sum_{i=1}^{N_{\text{SN}}}\chi^{2}_{i,\text{data}}+\chi^{2}_{\text{priors}}
(B1)
with a per-supernova
χ
i
,
data
2
=
(
𝝁
obs
,
i
−
𝝁
model
,
i
)
⊤
​
𝑪
i
−
1
​
(
𝝁
obs
,
i
−
𝝁
model
,
i
)
\displaystyle\chi^{2}_{i,\text{data}}=\left(\bm{\mu}_{\text{obs},i}-\bm{\mu}_{\text{model},i}\right)^{\top}\bm{C}_{i}^{-1}\left(\bm{\mu}_{\text{obs},i}-\bm{\mu}_{\text{model},i}\right)
(B2)
where the
𝝁
obs
,
i
\bm{\mu}_{\text{obs},i}
vector contains all individual light-curve point measurements of the
i
i
-th supernova, and
𝑪
i
\bm{C}_{i}
their statistical weights. This covariance depends on the signal-to-noise ratio of an individual measurement (on the diagonal), and the per-SN-effects (intrinsic dispersion and dust extinction uncertainty).
𝝁
model
,
i
\bm{\mu}_{\text{model},i}
depends on the theoretical prediction of the distance modulus
μ
th
,
i
\mu_{\text{th},i}
for that supernova, and the calibration, including the supernova model. In contrast to frequentist analyses, these are not assumed rigid and uncorrelated, but are also found during the fit.
28
28
28
For a detailed breakdown of
𝝁
model
,
i
\bm{\mu}_{\text{model},i}
, we refer the reader to
Rubin
et al.
(
2025b
)
, where
𝝁
model
,
i
\bm{\mu}_{\text{model},i}
is called
m
i
​
j
​
k
m_{ijk}
.
We include Gaussian priors with zero mean on the instrumental calibration in
χ
priors
2
\chi^{2}_{\text{priors}}
to prevent the fit from assuming unreasonable calibration values.
χ
2
\chi^{2}
is a function of all distance moduli and nuisance parameters. We find the global minimum and compute the Hessian at that point. By inversion, we obtain a full covariance matrix of distance moduli and nuisance parameters. The distance modulus covariance matrix
𝒞
​
(
z
i
,
z
j
)
\mathcal{C}(z_{i},z_{j})
(cf. eq.
A4
) is then extracted as a sub-matrix of the full covariance matrix. This process marginalizes over all nuisance parameters and thus correctly propagates all uncertainties into
𝒞
​
(
z
i
,
z
j
)
\mathcal{C}(z_{i},z_{j})
.
The supernova model is parametrized and integrated into
𝝁
model
,
i
\bm{\mu}_{\text{model},i}
. There is a flat prior placed on these parameters. The curvature of
χ
2
\chi^{2}
as a function of model fitting parameters is automatically found during the fit, so the model error is included in the full covariance matrix. Thus, it is propagated to the distance modulus covariance matrix as intended.
B.3.1
Cosmology forecast
Because
χ
2
\chi^{2}
is a function of all distance moduli and calibration/model parameters, the distance moduli are correlated. We find the global minimum of
χ
2
\chi^{2}
and compute the Hessian at that point. By inversion, we obtain a full covariance matrix of distance moduli and nuisance parameters. The distance modulus covariance matrix
𝒞
​
(
z
i
,
z
j
)
\mathcal{C}(z_{i},z_{j})
is then extracted as a sub-matrix of the full covariance matrix. This process marginalizes over all nuisance parameters and thus correctly propagates all uncertainties into
𝒞
​
(
z
i
,
z
j
)
\mathcal{C}(z_{i},z_{j})
.
The Fisher matrix of the simulated survey is calculated based on the simulated distance modulus covariance matrix
𝒞
​
(
z
i
,
z
j
)
\mathcal{C}(z_{i},z_{j})
(
eq.
A4
). After combining this with the baseline Fisher matrix (§
II
), we invert the combined Fisher matrix to obtain the covariance matrix of cosmological parameters.
Appendix C
Toy model to calculate supernova Ia yield
We construct a simple toy model to estimate the expected ratio of total observed supernovae to Type Ia supernovae,
N
tot
/
N
Ia
N_{\rm tot}/N_{\rm Ia}
, in a magnitude-limited survey. The number of supernovae of a given type,
N
N
, that a survey can detect is proportional to the intrinsic volumetric rate,
r
r
, and the maximum volume,
V
max
V_{\rm max}
, out to which detection is possible. This volume is determined by the survey’s limiting magnitude,
m
lim
m_{\rm lim}
, and the supernova’s peak absolute magnitude,
M
peak
M_{\rm peak}
. From the definition of the distance modulus, the maximum detectable distance
d
max
∝
10
0.2
​
(
m
lim
−
M
peak
)
d_{\rm max}\propto 10^{0.2(m_{\rm lim}-M_{\rm peak})}
, which means the corresponding volume scales as
V
max
∝
d
max
3
∝
10
0.6
​
(
m
lim
−
M
peak
)
V_{\rm max}\propto d_{\rm max}^{3}\propto 10^{0.6(m_{\rm lim}-M_{\rm peak})}
in an Euclidean geometry approximation.
When we take the ratio of the number of observed Core-Collapse Supernovae (
N
CC
N_{\rm CC}
) to Type Ia Supernovae (
N
Ia
N_{\rm Ia}
), the survey-dependent terms such as the limiting magnitude cancel out. This leaves a ratio that depends only on the intrinsic rates and luminosities of the two populations:
N
CC
N
Ia
=
r
CC
×
V
max
,
CC
r
Ia
×
V
max
,
Ia
=
r
CC
r
Ia
×
10
[
0.6
​
(
M
Ia
−
M
CC
)
]
\displaystyle\frac{N_{\rm CC}}{N_{\rm Ia}}=\frac{r_{\rm CC}\times V_{\rm max,CC}}{r_{\rm Ia}\times V_{\rm max,Ia}}=\frac{r_{\rm CC}}{r_{\rm Ia}}\times 10^{\left[0.6(M_{\rm Ia}-M_{\rm CC})\right]}
(C1)
To evaluate this ratio, we adopt representative values from the literature. At a redshift of
z
≈
0.3
z\approx 0.3
, the supernova rates are approximately
r
Ia
≈
3
×
10
−
5
yr
−
1
​
Mpc
−
3
r_{\rm Ia}\approx$3\text{\times}{10}^{-5}\text{\,}\mathrm{y}\mathrm{r}^{-1}\,\mathrm{M}\mathrm{p}\mathrm{c}^{-3}$
(Frohmaier
et al.
,
2019
)
and
r
CC
≈
2
×
10
−
4
yr
−
1
​
Mpc
−
3
r_{\rm CC}\approx$2\text{\times}{10}^{-4}\text{\,}\mathrm{y}\mathrm{r}^{-1}\,\mathrm{M}\mathrm{p}\mathrm{c}^{-3}$
(Strolger
et al.
,
2015
)
. For the peak absolute magnitudes, we use a standard value of
M
Ia
=
−
19.3
M_{\rm Ia}=-19.3
for SNe Ia. For the fainter and more diverse CCSN population, we adopt a characteristic absolute magnitude of
M
CC
=
−
17.0
M_{\rm CC}=-17.0
, a value consistent with the mean of observed distributions
(Richardson
et al.
,
2014
)
.
Substituting these values into the equation yields:
N
CC
N
Ia
\displaystyle\frac{N_{\rm CC}}{N_{\rm Ia}}
≈
2
×
10
−
4
3
×
10
−
5
×
10
[
0.6
​
(
−
19.3
−
(
−
17.0
)
)
]
\displaystyle\approx\frac{$2\text{\times}{10}^{-4}\text{\,}$}{$3\text{\times}{10}^{-5}\text{\,}$}\times 10^{\left[0.6(-19.3-(-17.0))\right]}
≈
6.67
×
10
[
0.6
​
(
−
2.3
)
]
\displaystyle\approx 6.67\times 10^{\left[0.6(-2.3)\right]}
≈
6.67
×
10
−
1.38
≈
0.28
\displaystyle\approx 6.67\times 10^{-1.38}\approx 0.28
(C2)
This result suggests that the number of observable CCSNe is approximately 28% of the number of SNe Ia. Therefore, the ratio of the total number of supernovae to SNe Ia is
N
tot
/
N
Ia
=
(
N
Ia
+
N
CC
)
/
N
Ia
≈
1.28
N_{\rm tot}/N_{\rm Ia}=(N_{\rm Ia}+N_{\rm CC})/N_{\rm Ia}\approx 1.28
.
Appendix D
Exposure time calculations and custom scheduling
Here we present a few preliminary calculations and concepts revolving around a custom DESI supernova program, using custom exposure times and without being restricted to tiles. This would become applicable for a possible extension to the baseline survey presented in the main body of this work.
In short, one would run a clustering algorithm to find pointings with the most SNe, and then calculate the required exposure time to reach the faintest object in that pointing.
D.1
Impact of SN brightness distribution
Intrinsically fainter supernovae are exponentially harder to observe, so determining the exposure time required for an average supernova is not representative of the actually required average exposure time. Here, we calculate the average additional time required to observe a supernova, allowing for a distribution in raw observed brightnesses (not to be confused with the intrinsic scatter after standardization).
We first determine the additional exposure time required to maintain a constant signal-to-noise ratio for a fainter supernova. The signal scales like (
S
∝
F
​
t
S\propto F\,t
). We observe from the ground, where the sky background will dominate, especially for fainter supernovae for which this calculation is relevant. Here, the noise scales like (
N
∝
t
N\propto\sqrt{t}
).
To maintain a constant SNR, we thus require
F
​
t
=
F
′
​
t
′
F\sqrt{t}=F^{\prime}\sqrt{t^{\prime}}
, or
t
′
t
=
(
F
F
′
)
2
=
10
0.8
​
Δ
​
m
\frac{t^{\prime}}{t}=\left(\frac{F}{F^{\prime}}\right)^{2}=10^{0.8\Delta m}
(D1)
where we used
Δ
​
m
=
−
2.5
​
log
10
⁡
(
F
′
/
F
)
\Delta m=-2.5\log_{10}(F^{\prime}/F)
.
Fainter supernovae thus require exponentially more exposure time. Thus, even with a symmetrical distribution of magnitudes, the average required exposure time
⟨
t
⟩
\left\langle t\right\rangle
is skewed upwards compared to the time
t
0
t_{0}
required to expose a supernova with average magnitude. Assuming
Δ
​
m
\Delta m
follows a Gaussian distribution
𝒩
​
(
0
,
σ
)
\mathcal{N}(0,\sigma)
, the expectation value is
⟨
t
⟩
t
0
=
⟨
10
0.8
​
Δ
​
m
⟩
=
exp
⁡
[
1
2
​
σ
2
​
(
0.8
​
ln
⁡
10
)
2
]
.
\frac{\left\langle t\right\rangle}{t_{0}}=\left\langle 10^{0.8\Delta m}\right\rangle=\exp\left[\frac{1}{2}\sigma^{2}(0.8\ln 10)^{2}\right].
(D2)
For the simplest standardization model only taking into account color
c
c
and stretch
x
1
x_{1}
, the corrected magnitude is
m
corr
=
m
B
+
α
​
x
1
−
β
​
c
+
…
\displaystyle m_{\rm corr}=m_{B}+\alpha x_{1}-\beta c+...
(D3)
where
m
B
m_{B}
is the observed magnitude in the
B
B
-band
(Tripp,
1998
)
.
Typical values are
σ
x
1
=
1
\sigma_{x_{1}}=1
and
α
≈
0.17
\alpha\approx 0.17
,
σ
c
≈
0.09
\sigma_{c}\approx 0.09
and
β
≈
3.6
\beta\approx 3.6
(Rubin
et al.
,
2025a
)
and a residual scatter/magnitude dispersion of
σ
m
,
corr
=
0.15
\sigma_{m,{\rm corr}}=0.15
. “Error propagating” these to
m
B
m_{B}
leads to a scatter of raw observed magnitudes
σ
m
≈
0.40
\sigma_{m}\approx 0.40
. Thus,
⟨
t
⟩
/
t
0
≈
1.30
\left\langle t\right\rangle/t_{0}\approx 1.30
, so the average required exposure time is around
30
%
30\%
higher than the exposure time needed for an average-brightness supernova.
Here we use a middle-ground assumption of
σ
m
≈
0.35
\sigma_{m}\approx 0.35
raw scatter in our exposure time analysis, resulting in
⟨
t
⟩
/
t
0
≈
1.23
\left\langle t\right\rangle/t_{0}\approx 1.23
.
Since this effect is not explicitly redshift dependent (if the SN population doesn’t drift),
⟨
t
⟩
/
t
0
\left\langle t\right\rangle/t_{0}
can just be applied as a global modifier to the total exposure time.
D.2
Impact of redshift binning
Assuming all supernovae to be at the bin center will lead to an underestimate of exposure time: Just by volumetric arguments, there will be more supernovae per unit time in the redshift interval
[
z
mid
,
z
mid
+
Δ
​
z
/
2
]
[z_{\rm mid},z_{\rm mid}+\Delta z/2]
compared to
[
z
mid
−
Δ
​
z
/
2
,
z
mid
]
[z_{\rm mid}-\Delta z/2,z_{\rm mid}]
.
Given an approximately constant volumetric rate, the number of supernovae per unit time
d
​
N
dN
in a “comoving distance shell” of thickness
d
​
χ
d\chi
is
d
​
N
\displaystyle dN
∝
χ
2
​
(
z
)
​
d
​
χ
​
1
1
+
z
\displaystyle\propto\chi^{2}(z)\,d\chi\,\frac{1}{1+z}
(D4)
where again
χ
​
(
z
)
=
∫
0
z
d
​
z
′
E
​
(
z
′
)
\chi(z)=\int_{0}^{z}\frac{dz^{\prime}}{E(z^{\prime})}
and
E
​
(
z
)
E(z)
given in eq.
A3
. The additional redshift factor accounts for the time dilation that converts source-frame rate to observer-frame rate.
The quantity
d
​
N
/
d
​
z
dN/dz
can be interpreted as an unnormalized probability density function to find a supernova at some redshift
z
z
. From the above equation, using
d
​
χ
/
d
​
z
=
1
/
E
​
(
z
)
d\chi/dz=1/E(z)
, and omitting constants, we get
p
​
(
z
)
∝
χ
2
​
(
z
)
(
1
+
z
)
​
E
​
(
z
)
.
\displaystyle p(z)\propto\frac{\chi^{2}(z)}{(1+z)E(z)}.
(D5)
Clearly, more supernovae are found at higher redshifts, so the mean redshift of a supernova in any given bin is higher than its center. To compute the impact on the required exposure time, we again use the ansatz that the signal-to-noise ratio should stay constant. This approach only works here because the redshift bins are narrow, so we don’t lose significant parts of the the spectrum from redshifting out of the range of the filters.
29
29
29
For bins of width
Δ
​
z
=
0.05
\Delta z=0.05
, the spectra are redshifted by less than
5
%
5\%
, and this difference gets smaller towards higher redshifts.
The ratio of the average exposure time in a redshift bin
⟨
t
⟩
\left\langle t\right\rangle
to exposure time at the redshift bin center
t
mid
t_{\rm mid}
is
⟨
t
⟩
z
t
mid
=
⟨
d
L
4
​
(
z
)
⟩
z
d
L
4
​
(
z
mid
)
\frac{\left\langle t\right\rangle_{z}}{t_{\rm mid}}=\frac{\left\langle d_{L}^{4}(z)\right\rangle_{z}}{d_{L}^{4}(z_{\rm mid})}
(D6)
where the expectation value integral is performed from
z
min
z_{\rm{min}}
to
z
max
z_{\rm{max}}
, the borders of each redshift bin. This effect is smaller at higher redshifts due to the smaller relative bin width
Δ
​
z
/
z
\Delta z/z
.
z
z
-bin
t
0
t_{0}\,
[min]
SNR
15
​
Å
\rm SNR_{15$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}$}
SNR
tot
\rm SNR_{tot}
⟨
t
⟩
\langle t\rangle\,
[min]
[
0.05
,
0.10
]
[0.05,0.10]
0.5
5.8-6.6
106-119
1.0
[
0.10
,
0.15
]
[0.10,0.15]
1.5
5.9-6.8
105-118
2.2
[
0.15
,
0.20
]
[0.15,0.20]
3.0
5.6-6.4
96-109
4.1
[
0.20
,
0.25
]
[0.20,0.25]
5.5
5.2-6.1
93-105
7.2
[
0.25
,
0.30
]
[0.25,0.30]
9.5
5.0-5.9
90-103
12.2
[
0.30
,
0.35
]
[0.30,0.35]
14.5
5.0-5.5
88-96
18.4
Table 1:
Required effective exposure times
t
0
t_{0}
to observe a SN Ia with average brightness at the redshift bin center with
SNR
15
​
Å
>
5
\rm SNR_{15$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolAngstrom}$}>5
. SNR ranges refer to
±
5
\pm 5
days (observer frame) around peak brightness.
⟨
t
⟩
z
\langle t\rangle_{z}
is the mean exposure time accounting for the redshift distribution and magnitude scatter within the bin.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA