CollideNet: Hierarchical Multi-scale Video Representation Learning with Disentanglement for Time-To-Collision Forecasting
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
2
Related work
3
Method
4
Experiments
5
Results
5.1
Performance
6
Conclusion
References
License: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
arXiv:2604.16240v1 [cs.CV] 17 Apr 2026
1
1
institutetext:
Queen’s University, Canada
1
1
email:
{n.desai, ali.etemad, michael.greenspan}@queensu.ca
CollideNet: Hierarchical Multi-scale Video Representation Learning with Disentanglement for Time-To-Collision Forecasting
Nishq Poorav Desai
Michael Greenspan
Ali Etemad
Abstract
Time-to-Collision (TTC) forecasting is a critical task in collision prevention, requiring precise temporal prediction and comprehending both local and global patterns encapsulated in a video, both spatially and temporally. To address the multi-scale nature of video, we introduce a novel spatiotemporal hierarchical transformer-based architecture called CollideNet, specifically catered for effective TTC forecasting. In the spatial stream, CollideNet aggregates information for each video frame simultaneously at multiple resolutions. In the temporal stream, along with multi-scale feature encoding, CollideNet also disentangles the non-stationarity, trend, and seasonality components. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in comparison to prior works on three commonly used public datasets, setting a new state-of-the-art by a considerable margin.
We
conduct cross-dataset evaluations to analyze the generalization capabilities of our method, and visualize the effects of disentanglement of the trend and seasonality components of the video data.
We release our code at
https://github.com/DeSinister/CollideNet/
.
1
Introduction
In recent years, automated collision warning systems in the automotive industry have achieved significant advancements toward safer autonomous driving, preventing accidents and enhancing real-time decision-making in advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS)
[
30
]
. To brake effectively, it is necessary to accurately estimate the time for a potential collision, known as the Time-To-Collision (TTC), which has also been used to alert drivers and control autonomous vehicles to decelerate
[
18
]
. A study conducted by the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) reported that forward collision warnings reduced the rear-end crash rate per vehicle mile traveled by 22%
[
49
]
. Research by Daimler-Benz
[
31
]
found that a 1.5-second warning could prevent up to 90% of collisions, while even a brief 0.5-second warning could avoid 60% of potential collisions.
Figure 1
:
TTC forecasting task using multi-scale spatial and temporal information.
Accurate TTC forecasting is challenging because models must interpret both short-range details (e.g., nearby objects and sudden events) and long-range context (e.g., overall traffic flow). They must also handle limited visibility and occlusions, which makes it necessary to predict how objects and actions change in uncertain environments, making this task far more complex than basic recognition or tracking. One approach to consider the long- and short-range spatial and temporal dependencies is to capture features at multiple resolutions and combine them effectively via a multi-scale architecture
[
54
]
.
Existing TTC forecasting methods often rely on convolutional spatial filters, which provide spatial multi-scale receptive fields. However, these filters typically have small receptive fields and struggle to integrate global and local information effectively
[
11
,
36
]
. Moreover, they do not incorporate a multi-scale approach for the temporal dimension. On the other hand,
attention-based models such as transformers, which are commonly used to capture
temporal
patterns
[
3
,
2
,
10
]
,
are not inherently multi-scale and face challenges in learning long-range dependencies in video data. This is due to the quadratic space and time complexity of self-attention, which hinders its scalability
[
29
,
65
,
35
]
.
Therefore, there is a clear need for multi-scale models that integrate both short-term and long-term feature extraction in spatial and temporal dimensions to enhance TTC forecasting.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel hierarchical multi-scale Transformer-based method called
CollideNet
, with the aim of capturing both
local and global spatial and temporal features in traffic videos for TTC forecasting (see Figure
1
). To overcome the issue of occluded collisions or collisions occurring in localized regions where background noise may interfere with model learning, we propose an efficient module that leverages low-rank decomposition techniques. Inspired by prior works
[
60
,
20
,
34
,
15
]
that separate foreground and background for traffic-related tasks, we enhance this approach by modeling long-range background and short-range foreground dynamics using series decomposition
[
38
,
1
]
.
The series decomposition is performed using a moving average with a predefined window size
k
k
to extract the trend component, while the remaining time-series forms the seasonal component.
Unlike existing methods that operate directly on spatial dimensions, which leads to high computational costs, our method applies these decompositions on spatially encoded frames, drastically reducing computational overhead while disentangling seasonality (short-range) and trend (long-range) patterns.
In the temporal dimension, the standard point-wise self-attention struggles with capturing long-range predictive dependencies and suffers from a quadratic complexity. We integrate a segment-wise correlation-based attention instead that divides the time-series into segments and applies segment-wise correlation, inspired by
[
12
]
. This approach not only reduces computational complexity but also significantly improves the model’s ability to capture predictive dependencies across multiple scales.
Furthermore, to aid with long-range temporal modeling in transformers, we leverage the disentanglement of spatially encoded features along stationarity, building on ideas from
[
12
,
23
,
48
,
33
]
for more robust and efficient representations. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method, we conduct various experiments on 3 public datasets, the Dashcam Accident Dataset (DAD)
[
9
]
, the Car Crash Dataset (CCD)
[
6
]
, and the Detection of Traffic Anomaly Dataset (DoTA)
[
63
]
. Additionally, we perform thorough ablation studies to determine the impact of each key component of our method, as well as sensitivity analyses on different hyperparameters.
The main contributions of the paper are:
(
1
) We present a novel two-stream
hierarchical multi-scale transformer architecture in CollideNet, specifically designed to cater to the hierarchical spatial and temporal features for TTC forecasting in videos.
(
2
) For the first time in the context of TTC, we model the disentanglement of temporal patterns, namely non-stationarity, trend, and seasonality for temporal encoding, to enhance forecasting. We further notice that the enhancement in forecasting from disentanglement is compounded when used with the multi-scale architecture.
(
3
) Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on three datasets, especially outperforming previous methods by a large margin in the CCD dataset. Furthermore, we also demonstrate the generalizability of our model via cross-dataset evaluation. To enable rapid reproducibility of these results and to contribute to the area, we release our code at
https://github.com/DeSinister/CollideNet/
.
2
Related work
In this section, we review prior work on TTC forecasting. We also discuss collision anticipation and detection, which are closely related but are comparatively easier tasks, as they often rely on detection methods that do not require prediction of future events and are typically framed as classification problems. In contrast, TTC forecasting is a regression task, making it more challenging and less explored. Finally, we review relevant multi-scale architectures, which have been widely used in spatiotemporal modeling.
TTC forecasting.
Initial TTC forecasting techniques
[
46
]
have depended on agent localization achieved through object tracking and trajectory prediction. With the advent of spatiotemporal modeling advancements, 3D convolutional and two-stream networks have enabled direct extraction of spatial and temporal features. Classic two-stream approaches leverage CNNs for spatial modeling alongside RNNs for temporal dynamics
[
3
,
51
]
. More recently, attention-based mechanisms have emerged, offering an alternative to conventional convolutions for improved efficiency. Notably,
[
10
]
introduced a non-stationary attention framework that separates stationary (static) and non-stationary (dynamic) components to refine TTC forecasting. Despite advancements, TTC forecasting remains challenging, requiring models to capture both short- and long-term spatial-temporal dependencies. While CNNs offer multi-scale feature extraction, the convolutional filters have a limited receptive field. To address this, we propose a hierarchical multi-scale solution for robust TTC forecasting.
Collision anticipation and detection.
Existing works in this area are often classified into Traffic Accident Detection (Vision TAD) and Traffic Accident Anticipation (Vision TAA) tasks. Early Vision TAD methods
[
58
,
66
,
45
,
25
]
utilize frame-level feature analysis to distinguish accident frames from normal ones, often leveraging self-supervised learning or frame-reconstruction techniques
[
44
,
32
,
26
]
. Although recent Vision TAD approaches
[
56
,
5
]
have integrated pre-trained transformer-based models like Video Swin Transformers
[
24
]
. However, these methods typically fail to offer proactive collision warnings, which are important for collision prevention.
Conversely, Vision TAA methods have gained prominence for their preventive potential. Traditional TAA approaches
[
47
,
62
,
42
,
8
,
67
]
have relied on a combination of object detection, tracking, and trajectory-based accident anticipation, using detectors like YOLO
[
39
]
. For example,
[
64
]
introduced a Dynamic Spatial Attention module tailored for early accident anticipation. Building on this,
[
50
]
developed a framework incorporating graph convolution and graph attention to enhance prediction capabilities. However, these methods generally lack the capability to predict the exact time of impact, a critical factor for offering actionable insights and guiding effective interventions in imminent collision scenarios.
Multi-scale architectures.
Multi-scale architectures have already demonstrated notable success in video anomaly detection in a traffic setting
[
68
,
57
,
70
]
. For example,
[
57
]
uses features from different image resolutions, and
[
70
]
applies feature pyramids to improve anomaly detection. However, these methods focus on the spatial aspect; they do not capture temporal dynamics, which are crucial for detecting motion and appearance changes over time in traffic scenarios.
[
68
]
introduced a multi-scaled spatiotemporal representation learning method that leverages video continuity to design three proxy tasks to perform feature learning at both short- and long-range dependencies, i.e., continuity judgment, discontinuity localization, and missing frame estimation.
Recently, a hierarchical multi-scale Vision Transformer (MViT)
[
13
]
has been proposed, which can not only handle the global-range bottleneck of CNNs but also learn multi-scale representations over four scales.
It has achieved great benefits on large-scale vision data, although, as transformers lack inductive biases such as variance
[
11
]
, they need data on a larger scale.
To introduce this inductive bias, we employ a strong pretext task and hierarchically structure the spatial dimension of our transformer, drawing inspiration from
[
40
,
22
]
. This enables CollideNet, our proposed hierarchical multi-scale spatiotemporal method, to achieve robust TTC forecasting.
Figure 2
:
The architecture of the proposed method, CollideNet is presented. First, the hierarchical spatial encoder uses MUA-based attention in
f
Spatial
Hierarchical
f_{\text{Spatial}}^{\text{Hierarchical}}
to obtain spatial encodings of the video frames. Next, the video frame embeddings
z
t
z_{t}
are decomposed into trend
T
T
and seasonality
S
S
, followed by normalization to remove non-stationary effects based on mean
μ
z
\mu_{z}
and variance
σ
z
\sigma_{z}
. This process yields the stationarized time-series
z
t
′
z_{t}^{\prime}
.
The stationarized time-series is then processed by a multi-scale hierarchical temporal encoder
f
Temporal
Hierarchical
f_{\text{Temporal}}^{\text{Hierarchical}}
, which uses MSSC and PreMSSC.
Non-stationary information is then reintroduced into the transformer blocks via rescaling factors
τ
\tau
and
Δ
\Delta
, determined by the projector based on the previous normalization layer. Finally, the output is de-normalized using the original statistical parameters.
3
Method
Our network architecture employs a two-stream hierarchical multi-scale transformer-based design that captures diverse spatial and temporal scales, integrating global and local spatial features with both long- and short-term temporal dependencies to enable robust TTC forecasting. The overall architecture is shown in Figure
2
.
Spatial modeling.
Our goal is to efficiently capture both global and local spatial information. To achieve this, we adopt a hierarchical multi-stage approach inspired by prior work
[
22
,
40
]
, where early stages capture high-resolution local details,
and later stages extract global features by progressively reducing the number of patches while increasing feature dimensionality at lower resolutions.
This design balances local structure preservation and global context modeling, addressing the inefficiencies of
conventional ViTs, which typically maintain a constant resolution and patch token dimension.
Architectural modifications are often added to ViTs, which
introduce spatial biases to compensate for the lack of inductive bias that ViTs exhibit.
Instead, here we leverage Masked Autoencoders (MAE)
[
17
]
on a strong pretext task, following
[
40
]
.
The video sequence
x
t
x_{t}
is first patchified and then embedded with absolute positional encoding, which adds fixed position vectors to image patches to encode their spatial locations in the sequence. We use absolute positional encoding due to its lower computational complexity compared to relative positional encoding, relying on fixed embedded frames extracted over
L
L
spatial scales.
Each scale consists of a hierarchical function
f
Spatial
Hierarchical
f_{\text{Spatial}}^{\text{Hierarchical}}
, which contains transformer blocks with identical resolution across the spatial and patch token dimensions and captures hierarchical representations of spatial information at each stage along with a feed-forward layer.
Hierarchical transformer architectures require pooling of the query tokens (
Q
Q
) at each stage to progressively reduce dimensionality, while pooling of keys (
K
K
) and value (
V
V
) tokens is optional and primarily reduces the size of the attention matrix for computational efficiency
[
40
]
. For the spatial stream, the Masked Unit Attention (MUA) in
f
Spatial
Hierarchical
f_{\text{Spatial}}^{\text{Hierarchical}}
uses local attention instead of pooling attention of the original mViTv2 architecture in the initial stages, while global attention is used for the later stages.
Global attention is applied in later stages, as it is more computationally expensive, so switching to local attention early reduces overall computation overhead. The final stage produces the video frame embeddings
z
t
z_{t}
.
Temporal modeling.
Time series at different scales inherently exhibit distinct properties, with finer scales primarily capturing short-range detailed patterns and coarser scales highlighting long-range variations
[
28
]
.
Multi-scale architectures have proven to be effective in capturing these intricacies of the temporal dimension, while mitigating the limitations of standard transformers in modeling long-range dependencies
[
69
,
55
,
43
,
12
]
.
Temporal disentanglement is a common technique that breaks down a time-series into multiple components, each representing a distinct underlying pattern that is easier to model
[
23
,
48
,
33
,
61
]
.
Low-rank decomposition such as series decomposition
[
38
,
1
]
has been previously used to separate background (long-range) and foreground (short-ranged) information, improving long-range and short-range context modeling and overcoming issues like partial visibility or occlusions in traffic-related tasks
[
60
,
20
,
34
,
15
]
. However, prior work often uses this separation technique in the spatial dimension and leaves the temporal dynamics underexplored. Additionally, this approach can be computationally expensive for high-resolution spatial data. Consequently, unlike prior works, we use series decomposition on video frame embeddings
z
t
z_{t}
in the temporal dimension to disentangle seasonality (repetitive predictive patterns)
S
S
containing the foreground or short-range information and trend (long-term direction)
T
T
containing the background or long-range information. This distinction significantly reduces computational complexity.
Moreover, transformers struggle with forecasting when a real-world time-series is non-stationary, meaning it has changing statistical properties over time
[
23
]
. While prior work often attenuates the non-stationarity of the time-series to improve predictability, this comes at the cost of neglecting the inherent properties of real-world time-series. Following
[
23
]
, we disentangle the stationary and non-stationary components of the video frame embeddings
z
t
z_{t}
. We use normalization to attenuate the non-stationarity caused by mean and variance, which yields the stationarized embeddings
z
t
′
z_{t}^{\prime}
. In order to re-incorporate non-stationary information, we use a linear projector which uses the statistical properties (mean
μ
z
\mu_{z}
and variance
σ
z
\sigma_{z}
) of the original video frame embeddings
z
t
z_{t}
to yield rescaling factors
τ
\tau
and
Δ
\Delta
which will be later used to re-scale the calculated attention score in the attention mechanism.
For the hierarchical multi-scale temporal encoding, we use a standard Encoder-Decoder framework similar to the original Transformer
[
52
]
as shown in Figure
2
. The encoder extracts information from historical observations of the stationarized embeddings
z
t
′
z_{t}^{\prime}
, while the decoder outputs a unified video sequence embedding. The standard point-wise self-attention mechanism calculates the similarity of each element pair, increasing the computational and space complexity quadratically with the length of the time-series.
Methods such as
[
12
,
61
]
use a type of sparse attention called segment-wise correlation, which computes similarities between segments of the sequence rather than individual elements (See Figure
3(a)
). Segment-wise correlation also preserves local temporal structure, providing a trade-off between local feature fidelity and computational efficiency.
[
12
]
. Here, the length of the series segment determines the resolution. A large value captures long-range dependencies, while a small value captures short-range features. The Multi-Scale Segment-wise Correlation (MSSC) block applies segment-wise correlation at multiple scales, progressively doubling the segment length to capture both short- and long-range dependencies.
The Encoder block consists of
N
N
identical layers, each comprising a hierarchical temporal transformer
f
Temporal
Hierarchical
f_{\text{Temporal}}^{\text{Hierarchical}}
with MSSC and a feed-forward layer,
followed by a series decomposition module that disentangles the trend and seasonality of the embeddings.
Following
[
12
,
61
]
, the encoder discards the trend component to focus solely on modeling seasonal patterns, producing the encoder output
z
e
​
n
​
c
z_{enc}
, which contains the past seasonal information and serves as cross-information to help the decoder refine prediction results.
The decoder contains
M
M
identical layers and receives as input the encoder output
z
e
​
n
​
c
z_{enc}
along with the
T
T
and
S
S
components extracted prior to the normalization of the original time series.
The decoder adopts a structure similar to that of the encoder. The decomposition module in the decoder extracts the trend component after each layer, which is then added to the seasonality part to obtain the decoder output
z
d
​
e
​
c
z_{dec}
.
For forecasting, the query for a predicted time segment corresponds to its previous segment. Following the intuition that influential past segments should weigh more heavily on their future predictions
[
12
]
, the decoder incorporates the Predictive MSSC (PreMSSC) block as shown in Figure
2
, which is an extension of the MSSC block specialized for forecasting.
This block incorporates cross-attention, introducing a segment lag between the keys and values derived from the encoder output
z
e
​
n
​
c
z_{enc}
. The resulting attention-weighted scores are then shifted back to adjust the initial shift, as shown in Figure
3(b)
.
Finally, the De-Normalization module rescales the decoder output
z
d
​
e
​
c
z_{dec}
using the previously computed mean and variance, producing the final video sequence embedding for the TTC forecasting task.
(a)
Segment correlation without the predictive paradigm.
(b)
Segment correlation with the predictive paradigm.
Figure 3
:
The correlation score
c
j
c_{j}
quantifies the relationship between
Q
+
i
Q+{i}
and
K
j
K_{j}
.
Output
Y
i
Y_{i}
at the current segment
i
i
is determined by using the similarity between
Q
i
−
1
Q_{i-1}
from the previous segment
i
−
1
i-1
and the key
K
j
K_{j}
as the weight for the value
V
j
+
1
V_{j+1}
in the aggregation process.
4
Experiments
Dataset and evaluation metrics.
We use three publicly available datasets, namely
DAD
[
9
]
,
CCD
[
6
]
, and
DoTA
[
63
]
. These datasets are sourced from collision videos on YouTube and come with annotations indicating the time-of-collision, specifying the exact moment a collision begins in each video clip. Following
[
10
]
, we upsample the videos of the three datasets to 30 fps and a uniform resolution of 1280
×
\times
720 pixels. Next, we segment each video into 1-second clips, each assigned a TTC value based on the clip’s start time and the original video’s time-of-collision label. The DAD dataset consists of 1,130 collision videos with 5,540 post-processed clips, CCD contains 1,500 videos with 11,126 clips, and DoTA includes 4,677 videos with 28,455 clips. We maintain the provided dataset splits for training and evaluation. Consistent with prior work
[
10
,
2
,
3
]
, we use Mean Squared Error (MSE) as the evaluation metric for model performance across all datasets.
Methods
Backbone
CCD
DoTA
DAD
CNN-RNN
[
2
]
EfficientNet
0.93
1.79
0.75
Li3D
[
2
]
3D ConvNet
1.42
2.45
0.90
X3D
[
14
]
3D ConvNet
0.85
2.21
0.85
C3D
[
51
]
3D ConvNet
1.98
3.59
1.75
ResNet50 3D
[
16
]
3D ConvNet
0.87
2.11
0.88
VGG-16
[
27
]
VGG-16
0.54
1.78
0.74
ViViT
[
4
]
Vision Transformer
0.82
2.13
1.02
TimeSformer
[
7
]
Vision Transformer
0.63
1.98
0.79
Video Swin Trans.
[
24
]
Swin Transformer
0.62
2.03
0.79
HyCT
[
3
]
CNN-Transformer
0.78
2.13
0.91
Video-FocalNet
[
59
]
Focal Mod. Net
0.58
2.00
0.73
VidNeXt
[
10
]
ConvNeXt
0.53
1.89
0.77
CollideNet (Ours)
Multi-scale ViT
0.37
1.75
0.71
Table 1
:
Performance comparison across CCD, DoTA, and DAD datasets. Results are in MSE, where lower is better.
Baselines.
We compare our proposed method with previous TTC forecasting methods, such as CNN-RNN
[
51
]
, C3D
[
51
]
, VGG-16
[
27
]
, Li3D
[
2
]
, HyCT
[
3
]
,
and VidNeXt
[
10
]
. We also include models widely adopted in the community for video representation learning. In particular, we use convolution-based video learners
ResNet50 3D
[
16
]
and X3D
[
14
]
(we use the X3D-M version).
Additionally, we use transformer-based methods ViViT
[
4
]
, TimeSformer
[
7
]
, Video Swin Transformer
[
24
]
, and Video-FocalNet
[
59
]
. We specifically include Video-FocalNet
[
59
]
, which uses focal modulations that are similar to multi-scale hierarchical architecture to model global and spatial context similar to the proposed method, as well as Video Swin Transformer
[
24
]
, which uses a spatiotemporal stream for hierarchical transformer in contrast to our proposed two-stream architecture. All these models are converted to TTC baselines by removing the head layer and using the final video sequence embedding, which is connected to a regression head consisting of two MLP layers, each followed by ReLU activation and a dropout layer.
Implementation details.
We use a pair of NVIDIA A-100 GPUs for training. We use an initial learning rate of
1
​
e
−
6
1e^{-6}
, which dynamically decays when the monitored metric stops improving, with a patience of 5 epochs. To prevent overfitting, we apply early stopping with a patience of 15 epochs. Training is conducted for 50 epochs with a batch size of 16, using MSE loss. We employ a step size of 4 and use half-bit mixed precision training to reduce computational overhead. Following
[
10
]
, we handle the class imbalance in the TTC forecasting task by upsampling video clips through duplication and augmenting brightness, contrast, saturation, and hue. All video frames are resized to a resolution of 224
×
\times
224.
We use the available implementations of the baseline models in PyTorch.
Model
Params (M)
Latency (ms)
Throughput (samples/sec)
CNN-RNN
[
2
]
25.20
22.09
45.26
Li3D
[
2
]
0.98
1.77
563.73
X3D
[
14
]
3.10
15.40
64.93
C3D
[
51
]
80.00
11.08
90.26
ResNet50 3D
[
16
]
31.80
52.10
19.19
VGG16
[
27
]
15.10
30.95
32.31
ViViT
[
4
]
114.80
43.99
22.73
TimeSformer
[
7
]
121.31
11.26
8.99
Video Swin Trans.
[
24
]
87.70
70.77
14.13
HyCT
[
3
]
23.60
198.04
5.05
Video-FocalNet
[
59
]
156.98
138.11
7.24
VidNeXt
[
10
]
125.09
83.36
12.00
CollideNet (Ours)
51.86
125.97
7.94
Table 2
:
Comparison of model complexity in Parameters. Convolutional models, which are generally light-weight, are shown in
grey
.
5
Results
5.1
Performance
Within-dataset evaluation.
We compare our proposed method with state-of-the-art methods and widely used spatiotemporal models as baselines for TTC forecasting tasks, measured in MSE.
As shown in Table
1
, our proposed method outperforms all baselines across all datasets, achieving the lowest MSE scores of 0.37 on CCD, 1.75 on DoTA, and 0.71 on DAD, respectively. Notably, we observe a significant margin between CollideNet and the second-best method on the CCD dataset, with an improvement of 30% in MSE.
These results clearly demonstrate the superiority of hierarchical multi-scale modeling, as implemented in CollideNet. Transformer-based approaches, such as VidNeXt
[
10
]
and Video-FocalNet
[
59
]
, which yield the second-best performance on the CCD and DAD datasets, respectively, fail to match the consistency of CollideNet.
Model complexity.
Table
2
compares the model complexity in terms of the number of parameters (in millions) for various state-of-the-art models.
CollideNet achieves a reasonable parameter count, which is notably lower compared to transformer-based models like ViViT, TimeSformer and Video-FocalNet, while still delivering state-of-the-art performance.
This demonstrates that CollideNet’s design reduces parameter size while delivering robust predictive capability.
Method
Training
Eval
MSE
Video-FocalNet
CCD
DoTA
2.047
Video-FocalNet
CCD
DAD
0.787
Video-FocalNet
DoTA
CCD
0.563
Video-FocalNet
DoTA
DAD
0.760
Video-FocalNet
DAD
CCD
0.603
Video-FocalNet
DAD
DoTA
1.984
VidNeXt
CCD
DoTA
1.988
VidNeXt
CCD
DAD
0.817
VidNeXt
DoTA
CCD
0.552
VidNeXt
DoTA
DAD
0.813
VidNeXt
DAD
CCD
0.604
VidNeXt
DAD
DoTA
2.020
CollideNet
CCD
DoTA
1.711
CollideNet
CCD
DAD
0.731
CollideNet
DoTA
CCD
0.382
CollideNet
DoTA
DAD
0.727
CollideNet
DAD
CCD
0.439
CollideNet
DAD
DoTA
1.761
Table 3
:
Cross-dataset evaluation.
Cross-dataset evaluation.
Table
3
presents a cross-dataset evaluation.
The results reveal significant MSE variations across datasets, highlighting domain shift challenges in video-based TTC tasks. We observe that CollideNet demonstrates superior generalization, achieving the lowest MSE in most transfer scenarios, including an MSE of 1.711 on CCD-to-DoTA, outperforming its performance on DoTA. This indicates CollideNet’s ability to extract more transferable features that generalize effectively across domains by consistently mitigating domain shift degradation compared to other methods. While Video-FocalNet and VidNeXt show competitive performance, VidNeXt slightly outperforms Video-FocalNet on CCD and DoTA, while both methods struggle with consistency across datasets.
6
Conclusion
In this work, we tackle the critical task of TTC forecasting, a key challenge in collision prevention that requires precise temporal predictions for timely intervention. Recognizing the inherently multi-scale nature of video data, which encapsulates a diverse range from long- to short-range dependencies, we propose CollideNet, a novel two-stream hierarchical method designed to address limitations in current state-of-the-art approaches and to effectively capture multi-scale spatiotemporal features while disentangling and modeling trend, seasonality, and non-stationarity components.
We validate the effectiveness of CollideNet through comprehensive experiments on three benchmark datasets, outperforming all prior methods.
Additionally, cross-dataset evaluations underscore CollideNet’s superior generalization capabilities, while visualizations reveal the benefits of trend and seasonality disentanglement.
Acknowledgments
We thank Geotab Inc.,
the City of Kingston, and NSERC for supporting this work, as well as Debaditya Shome and Pritam Sarkar for their contributions.
References
[1]
O. D. Anderson and M. G. Kendall
(1976)
Time-Series.
.
The Statistician
25
,
pp. 308
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§3
.
[2]
T. Anjum, L. Chirade, B. Lin, and A. Narayan
(2023)
Learning Spatio-Temporal Features via 3D CNNs to Forecast Time-to-Accident
.
In
International Conference on Agents and Artificial Intelligence
,
pp. 532–540
.
Cited by:
§1
,
Table 1
,
Table 1
,
Table 2
,
Table 2
,
§4
,
§4
.
[3]
T. Anjum, D. Kumar, and A. Narayan
(2023)
Spatio-temporal Analysis of Dashboard Camera Videos for Time-To-Accident Forecasting
.
In
IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
,
pp. 1–8
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§2
,
Table 1
,
Table 2
,
§4
,
§4
.
[4]
A. Arnab, M. Dehghani, G. Heigold, C. Sun, M. Lučić, and C. Schmid
(2021)
ViViT: A video vision transformer
.
In
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
,
pp. 6836–6846
.
Cited by:
Table 1
,
Table 2
,
§4
.
[5]
A. Bajgoti, R. Gupta, P. B, R. Dwivedi, M. Siwach, and D. Gupta
(2023)
SwinAnomaly: Real-Time Video Anomaly Detection Using Video Swin Transformer and SORT
.
IEEE Access
11
,
pp. 111093–111105
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[6]
W. Bao, Q. Yu, and Y. Kong
(2020-05)
Uncertainty-based Traffic Accident Anticipation with Spatio-Temporal Relational Learning
.
In
ACM Multimedia Conference
,
Cited by:
§1
,
§4
.
[7]
G. Bertasius, H. Wang, and L. Torresani
(2021)
Is Space-time Attention All You Need for Video Understanding?
.
In
International Conference on Machine Learning
,
Cited by:
Table 1
,
Table 2
,
§4
.
[8]
P. Chakraborty, A. Sharma, and C. Hegde
(2018)
Freeway Traffic Incident Detection from Cameras: A Semi-Supervised Learning Approach
.
International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems
,
pp. 1840–1845
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[9]
F. Chan, Y. Chen, Y. Xiang, and M. Sun
(2016)
Anticipating Accidents in Dashcam Videos
.
In
Asian Conference on Computer Vision
,
pp. 136–153
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§4
.
[10]
N. P. Desai, A. Etemad, and M. Greenspan
(2025)
Cyclecrash: a dataset of bicycle collision videos for collision prediction and analysis
.
In
2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV)
,
pp. 6688–6698
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§2
,
Table 1
,
Table 2
,
§4
,
§4
,
§4
,
§5.1
.
[11]
A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, J. Uszkoreit, and N. Houlsby
(2021)
An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale
.
In
International Conference on Learning Representations
,
Cited by:
§1
,
§2
.
[12]
D. Du, B. Su, and Z. Wei
(2023)
Preformer: Predictive Transformer with Multi-scale Segment-wise Correlations for Long-term Time Series Forecasting
.
In
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
,
pp. 1–5
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§3
,
§3
,
§3
.
[13]
H. Fan, B. Xiong, K. Mangalam, Y. Li, Z. Yan, J. Malik, and C. Feichtenhofer
(2021)
Multiscale Vision Transformers
.
In
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
,
pp. 6824–6835
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[14]
C. Feichtenhofer
(2020)
X3D: Expanding Architectures for Efficient Video Recognition
.
In
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
,
Cited by:
Table 1
,
Table 2
,
§4
.
[15]
J. Grosek and J. N. Kutz
(2014)
Dynamic Mode Decomposition for Real-Time Background/Foreground Separation in Video
.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1404.7592
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§3
.
[16]
K. Hara, H. Kataoka, and Y. Satoh
(2017)
Learning Spatio-temporal Features with 3d Residual Networks for Action Recognition
.
In
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops
,
pp. 3154–3160
.
Cited by:
Table 1
,
Table 2
,
§4
.
[17]
K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick
(2022)
Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners
.
In
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
,
pp. 15979–15988
.
Cited by:
§3
.
[18]
W. Janssen and M. Thomas
(1994)
Time-to-Collision and Collision Avoidance Systems
.
International Co-operation on Theories and Concepts in Traffic Safety Workshop
.
Cited by:
§1
.
[19]
W. Kay, J. Carreira, K. Simonyan, B. Zhang, C. Hillier, S. Vijayanarasimhan, F. Viola, T. Green, T. Back, A. Natsev, M. Suleyman, and A. Zisserman
(2017)
The Kinetics Human Action Video Dataset
.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.06950
.
Cited by:
A.2 t-SNE visualization of the datasets
.
[20]
J. N. Kutz, X. Fu, S. L. Brunton, and N. B. Erichson
(2015)
Multi-resolution Dynamic Mode Decomposition for Foreground/Background Separation and Object Tracking
.
In
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshop
,
Vol.
,
pp. 921–929
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§3
.
[21]
D. Kwiatkowski, P. C.B. Phillips, P. Schmidt, and Y. Shin
(1992)
Testing the Null Hypothesis of Stationarity Against the Alternative of a Unit Root: How Sure Are We That Economic Time Series Have a Unit Root?
.
Journal of Econometrics
54
(
1
),
pp. 159–178
.
Cited by:
A.3.3 Non-stationarity
.
[22]
Y. Li, C. Wu, H. Fan, K. Mangalam, B. Xiong, J. Malik, and C. Feichtenhofer
(2022)
mViTv2: Improved Multiscale Vision Transformers for Classification and Detection
.
In
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
,
pp. 4804–4814
.
Cited by:
§2
,
§3
.
[23]
Y. Liu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long
(2022)
Non-stationary transformers: Exploring the Stationarity in Time Series Forecasting
.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
35
,
pp. 9881–9893
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§3
,
§3
.
[24]
Z. Liu, J. Ning, Y. Cao, Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, S. Lin, and H. Hu
(2022)
Video Swin Transformer
.
In
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
,
pp. 3202–3211
.
Cited by:
§2
,
Table 1
,
Table 2
,
§4
.
[25]
H. Luo and F. Wang
(2023)
A Simulation-Based Framework for Urban Traffic Accident Detection
.
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
,
pp. 1–5
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[26]
W. Luo, W. Liu, D. Lian, and S. Gao
(2021)
Future Frame Prediction Network for Video Anomaly Detection
.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
44
,
pp. 7505–7520
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[27]
A. Manglik, X. Weng, E. Ohn-Bar, and K. M. Kitanil
(2019)
Forecasting Time-to-Collision from Monocular Video: Feasibility, Dataset, and Challenges
.
In
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
,
pp. 8081–8088
.
Cited by:
Table 1
,
Table 2
,
§4
.
[28]
M. C. Mozer
(1991)
Induction of Multiscale Temporal Structure
.
In
Neural Information Processing Systems
,
Cited by:
§3
.
[29]
P. Nagar, A. Shastry, J. Chaudhari, and C. Arora
(2024)
SEMA: Semantic Attention for Capturing Long-Range Dependencies in Egocentric Lifelogs
.
IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision
,
pp. 7010–7020
.
Cited by:
§1
.
[30]
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)
(2024)
Automated Vehicles for Safety
.
Note:
Accessed: 2024-12-24
External Links:
Link
Cited by:
§1
.
[31]
National Transportation Safety Board
(2001)
Special Investigation Report: Highway Vehicle and Infrastructure-based Technology for the Prevention of Rear-end Collisions
.
Safety Recommendation Report
,
National Transportation Safety Board
.
External Links:
Link
Cited by:
§1
.
[32]
K. Nguyen, D. Dinh, M. N. Do, and M. Tran
(2020)
Anomaly Detection in Traffic Surveillance Videos with GAN-based Future Frame Prediction
.
International Conference on Multimedia Retrieval
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[33]
B. N. Oreshkin, D. Carpov, N. Chapados, and Y. Bengio
(2019)
N-BEATS: Neural Basis Expansion Analysis for Interpretable Time Series Forecasting
.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10437
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§3
.
[34]
S. Pendergrass, S. L. Brunton, J. N. Kutz, N. B. Erichson, and T. Askham
(2017)
Dynamic Mode Decomposition for Background Modeling
.
In
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops
,
Vol.
,
pp. 1862–1870
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§3
.
[35]
H. Qin, D. Zhou, T. Xu, Z. Bian, and J. Li
(2023)
Factorization Vision Transformer: Modeling Long Range Dependency with Local Window Cost
.
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems
.
Cited by:
§1
.
[36]
Z. Qiu, T. Yao, C. Ngo, X. Tian, and T. Mei
(2019)
Learning Spatio-Temporal Representation With Local and Global Diffusion
.
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
,
pp. 12048–12057
.
Cited by:
§1
.
[37]
A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, G. Krueger, and I. Sutskever
(2021)
Learning Transferable Visual Models from Natural Language Supervision
.
In
International Conference on Machine Learning
,
Cited by:
A.3.3 Non-stationarity
.
[38]
C. RB
(1990)
STL: A Seasonal-Trend Decomposition Procedure Based on Loess
.
Journal Of Statistics
6
,
pp. 3–73
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§3
.
[39]
J. Redmon and A. Farhadi
(2018)
YOLOv3: An Incremental Improvement
.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10934
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[40]
C. Ryali, Y. Hu, D. Bolya, C. Wei, H. Fan, P. Huang, V. Aggarwal, A. Chowdhury, O. Poursaeed, J. Hoffman,
et al.
(2023)
Hiera: A Hierarchical Vision Transformer Without the Bells-and-Whistles
.
In
International Conference on Machine Learning
,
pp. 29441–29454
.
Cited by:
§2
,
§3
,
§3
.
[41]
S. E. Said and D. A. Dickey
(1984)
Testing for Unit Roots in Autoregressive-Moving Average Models of Unknown Order
.
Biometrika
71
(
3
),
pp. 599–607
.
Cited by:
A.3.3 Non-stationarity
.
[42]
K. K. Santhosh, D. P. Dogra, P. P. Roy, and A. Mitra
(2021)
Vehicular Trajectory Classification and Traffic Anomaly Detection in Videos Using a Hybrid CNN-VAE Architecture
.
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems
23
,
pp. 11891–11902
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[43]
M. A. Shabani, A. H. Abdi, L. Meng, and T. Sylvain
(2023)
Scaleformer: Iterative Multi-scale Refining Transformers for Time Series Forecasting
.
In
International Conference on Learning Representations
,
Cited by:
§3
.
[44]
D. Singh and C. K. Mohan
(2019)
Deep Spatio-Temporal Representation for Detection of Road Accidents Using Stacked Autoencoder
.
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems
20
,
pp. 879–887
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[45]
A. Srinivasan, A. Srikanth, H. Indrajit, and V. Narasimhan
(2020)
A Novel Approach for Road Accident Detection using DETR Algorithm
.
International Conference on Intelligent Data Science Technologies and Applications
,
pp. 75–80
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[46]
T. Suzuki, H. Kataoka, Y. Aoki, and Y. Satoh
(2018)
Anticipating Traffic Accidents with Adaptive Loss and Large-Scale Incident DB
.
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
,
pp. 3521–3529
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[47]
L. Taccari, F. Sambo, L. Bravi, S. Salti, L. Sarti, M. Simoncini, and A. Lori
(2018)
Classification of Crash and Near-Crash Events from Dashcam Videos and Telematics
.
International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems
,
pp. 2460–2465
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[48]
S. J. Taylor and B. Letham
(2018)
Forecasting at Scale
.
The American Statistician
72
(
1
),
pp. 37–45
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§3
.
[49]
E. R. Teoh
(2021-03)
Effectiveness of Front Crash Prevention Systems in Reducing Large Truck Real-World Crash Rates
.
Traffic Injury Prevention
.
Note:
Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, Highway Loss Data Institute, ID: 2211
External Links:
Link
Cited by:
§1
.
[50]
N. Thakur, P. Gouripeddi, and B. Li
(2024)
Graph(Graph): A Nested Graph-Based Framework for Early Accident Anticipation
.
In
IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision
,
pp. 7533–7541
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[51]
D. Tran, L. Bourdev, R. Fergus, L. Torresani, and M. Paluri
(2015)
Learning Spatiotemporal Features with 3d Convolutional Networks
.
In
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
,
pp. 4489–4497
.
Cited by:
§2
,
Table 1
,
Table 2
,
§4
.
[52]
A. Vaswani
(2017)
Attention is All You Need
.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
.
Cited by:
§3
.
[53]
P. von Platen, S. Patil, A. Lozhkov, P. Cuenca, N. Lambert, K. Rasul, M. Davaadorj, D. Nair, S. Paul, W. Berman, Y. Xu, S. Liu, and T. Wolf
(2022)
Diffusers: State-of-the-art Diffusion Models
.
Note:
https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers
Cited by:
A.3.4 Visualization of trend and seasonality
.
[54]
H. Wang, J. Peng, F. Huang, J. Wang, J. Chen, and Y. Xiao
(2023)
MICN: Multi-scale Local and Global Context Modeling for Long-term Series Forecasting
.
In
International Conference on Learning Representations
,
Cited by:
§1
.
[55]
S. Wang, H. Wu, X. L. Shi, T. Hu, H. Luo, L. Ma, J. Y. Zhang, and J. Zhou
(2024)
TimeMixer: Decomposable Multiscale Mixing for Time Series Forecasting
.
ArXiv
abs/2405.14616
.
Cited by:
§3
.
[56]
T. Wang, S. Kim, W. Ji, E. Xie, C. Ge, J. Chen, Z. Li, and P. Luo
(2023)
DeepAccident: A Motion and Accident Prediction Benchmark for V2X Autonomous Driving
.
In
Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence Conference on Artificial Intelligence
,
Cited by:
§2
.
[57]
X. Wang, Z. Che, K. Yang, B. Jiang, J. Tang, J. Ye, J. Wang, and Q. Qi
(2020)
Robust Unsupervised Video Anomaly Detection by Multipath Frame Prediction
.
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems
33
,
pp. 2301–2312
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[58]
X. Wang, J. Liu, T. Qiu, C. Mu, C. Chen, and P. Zhou
(2020)
A Real-Time Collision Prediction Mechanism With Deep Learning for Intelligent Transportation System
.
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology
69
,
pp. 9497–9508
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[59]
S. T. Wasim, M. U. Khattak, M. Naseer, S. Khan, M. Shah, and F. S. Khan
(2023)
Video-FocalNets: Spatio-Temporal Focal Modulation for Video Action Recognition
.
In
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
,
Cited by:
Table 1
,
Table 2
,
§4
,
§5.1
.
[60]
J. Wen, Y. Xu, J. Tang, Y. Zhan, Z. Lai, and X. Guo
(2014)
Joint Video Frame Set Division and Low-Rank Decomposition for Background Subtraction
.
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology
24
(
12
),
pp. 2034–2048
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§3
.
[61]
H. Wu, J. Xu, J. Wang, and M. Long
(2021)
Autoformer: Decomposition Transformers with Auto-Correlation for Long-Term Series Forecasting
.
In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
,
A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. W. Vaughan (Eds.)
,
Cited by:
§3
,
§3
.
[62]
M. Wu, C. Chang, J. M. Miao, and C. Lee
(2023)
Predicting Car Accidents with YOLOv7 Object Detection and Object Relationships
.
IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo Workshops
,
pp. 87–89
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[63]
Y. Yao, X. Wang, M. Xu, Z. Pu, Y. Wang, E. Atkins, and D. Crandall
(2022)
DoTA: unsupervised detection of traffic anomaly in driving videos
.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§4
.
[64]
C. Yi, T. Huang, H. Ye, and D. Zhan
(2023)
Improved Dynamic Spatial-Temporal Attention Network for Early Anticipation of Traffic Accidents
.
IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo Workshops
,
pp. 81–86
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[65]
J. H. Yoo, S. Kim, D. Lee, C. Kim, and S. Hong
(2023)
Towards End-to-End Generative Modeling of Long Videos with Memory-Efficient Bidirectional Transformers
.
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
,
pp. 22888–22897
.
Cited by:
§1
.
[66]
T. You and B. Han
(2020)
Traffic Accident Benchmark for Causality Recognition
.
In
European Conference on Computer Vision
,
Cited by:
§2
.
[67]
K. Zeng, S. Chou, F. Chan, J. C. Niebles, and M. Sun
(2017)
Agent-Centric Risk Assessment: Accident Anticipation and Risky Region Localization
.
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
,
pp. 1330–1338
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[68]
M. Zhang, J. Wang, Q. Qi, H. Sun, Z. Zhuang, P. Ren, R. Ma, and J. Liao
(2024)
Multi-Scale Video Anomaly Detection by Multi-Grained Spatio-Temporal Representation Learning
.
In
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
,
pp. 17385–17394
.
Cited by:
§2
.
[69]
S. Zhao, M. Jin, Z. Hou, C. Yang, Z. Li, Q. Wen, and Y. Wang
(2024)
HiMTM: Hierarchical Multi-Scale Masked Time Series Modeling with Self-Distillation for Long-Term Forecasting
.
In
ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management
,
pp. 3352–3362
.
Cited by:
§3
.
[70]
Y. Zhong, X. Chen, Y. Hu, P. Tang, and F. Ren
(2022)
Bidirectional Spatio-Temporal Feature Learning With Multiscale Evaluation for Video Anomaly Detection
.
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology
32
,
pp. 8285–8296
.
Cited by:
§2
.
Appendix
A.1. Release details
The code to implement the proposed method is publicly available and can be accessed at
https://github.com/DeSinister/CollideNet/
. The initial release comprises:
•
PyTorch-based implementation for CollideNet.
•
PyTorch-based implementations for the baselines.
•
PyTorch-based implementation for the pre-processing
used in the paper, and data loader codes for efficiency
and consistency.
A.2 t-SNE visualization of the datasets
Figure A1
:
tSNE representations from the CCD, DoTA, and DAD datasets.
To explore the nature of the video clips from the datasets, we use the t-SNE plot of the representational embeddings of 1000 video clips from each dataset via a standard Kinetics-400
[
19
]
pretrained model. The t-SNE visualization highlights conspicuous overlap among the datasets, suggesting that their feature representations share common latent structures. While DoTA exhibits some degree of separability, CCD and DAD are more intertwined, indicating a higher degree of similarity. This overlap underscores the challenges of cross-dataset generalization and emphasizes the importance of robust domain adaptation techniques in Figure
A1
.
A.3 Additional Results
ID
MS
T
S
NS
CCD
DoTA
DAD
1
✓
✓
✓
✓
0.366
1.747
0.705
2
-
✓
✓
✓
0.494
1.804
0.737
3
✓
-
✓
✓
0.391
1.759
0.722
4
✓
✓
-
✓
0.394
1.748
0.727
5
✓
✓
✓
-
0.415
1.765
0.728
6
-
✓
✓
-
0.945
1.774
0.733
7
✓
-
✓
-
0.458
1.777
0.723
8
✓
-
-
✓
0.442
1.768
0.721
9
✓
✓
-
-
0.386
1.756
0.731
10
-
-
-
✓
0.534
1.894
0.773
11
-
-
✓
-
1.092
1.822
0.746
12
-
✓
-
-
0.459
1.783
0.728
13
✓
-
-
-
0.450
1.776
0.726
14
-
-
-
-
1.094
2.112
0.862
Table A1
:
MSE results for ablation experiments across CCD, DoTA and DAD datasets (lower is better).
Multi-scale (MS)
indicates if a multi-scale structure is used in the spatial and temporal dimensions,
Trend (T)
and
Seasonality (S)
represent whether the disentanglement of trend and seasonality components, were incorporated in the temporal dimension, and
Non-stationarity (NS)
indicates if disentanglement of non-stationary information was modeled and incorporated.
A.3.1 Ablation study
We present the results of our ablation study in Table
A1
, in which we systematically remove key elements of our method. We begin by removing the multi-scale architecture (ID 2), which results in a drastic performance drop compared to the full model (ID 1). Next, removal of other individual components (ID 2, 3, 4) results in various amounts of degradation.
Furthermore, we observe that the removal of non-stationarity modeling (ID 5) causes more pronounced degradation than the removal of trend (ID 3) and seasonality (ID 4) pattern modeling.
While removing two components highlights their complementary roles in performance, we notice a similar pattern in which models excluding multi-scale architecture (ID 6) and non-stationarity modeling exhibit more significant drops than all other tests in which two components are removed (ID 7, 8, 9). The smallest performance degradation occurs when seasonality and non-stationarity modeling are both removed (ID 9).
Next, we remove three components at a time, where we observe that ablating all components except for the seasonality component (ID 11) results in the largest degradation compared to the removal of other components (ID 10, 12, 13), suggesting that seasonality has the least individual contribution to the overall performance.
Additionally, the degradation is the least when all the components except for the multi-scale structure are removed, further highlighting its effectiveness.
Finally, removing all components (ID 14) expectedly leads to the worst performance across the datasets. We also observe the synergy between the multi-scale structure and other components, as models containing multi-scale architectures with at least one additional component in most cases experience less degradation (e.g. ID 6 vs. ID 7-9). This is expected, as the multi-scale structure allows for disentanglement to occur across each scale, facilitating robust video representation learning and contributing to an overall improvement in TTC performance.
A.3.2 Sensitivity analysis
Figure A2
:
Sensitivity analysis for the effect of spatial scales, temporal scales, and decomposition window size.
Impact of spatial multi-scale structure.
We assess the sensitivity of the results to the number of spatial scales in CollideNet while keeping the temporal scales fixed at five, the maximum value, across all three datasets, as shown in Figure
A2
(a). Across all datasets, utilizing more than one spatial scale improves performance, indicating the benefits of multi-scale spatial encoding. However, no further gains are observed beyond three scales, and using four scales results in performance degradation. Additionally, we find that the CCD dataset is the most sensitive to variations in spatial scales compared to the other datasets.
Dataset
ADF Stat
ADF
p
-value
KPSS
p
-value
ADF Stat (norm)
ADF
p
-value (norm)
KPSS
p
-value (norm)
DAD
-2.848
0.170
0.048
-4.734
0.005
0.100
CCD
-2.323
0.240
0.048
-3.899
0.011
0.100
DoTA
-2.531
0.199
0.037
-4.898
0.002
0.100
Table A2
:
Analysis of non-stationarity in the video frame embeddings.
Impact of temporal multi-scale structure.
In Figure
A2
(b), we evaluate the effect of varying temporal scales on performance while setting the spatial scale at four. We find a similar pattern to that of spatial scales, where using more than one scale or adopting the multi-scale architecture improves performance. Moreover, using two scales gives the best results, after which performance slightly declines across all datasets.
In comparison, our method shows more resilience to the number of temporal scales than the spatial scales.
Further analysis of mixed scales.
We further examine the sensitivity by fixing one dimension at its optimal value and varying the other. Figure
A2
(c) shows the performance of different spatial scales with the temporal scale fixed at two scales. We observe a near-identical pattern as that when fixing the temporal scale at its maximum value in Figure
A2
(a); however, we notice that the performance of CCD and DoTA is best at the maximum temporal scale, i.e., four scales.
In Figure
A2
(d), the sensitivity to different temporal scales with the spatial scale fixed at three is shown. We observe higher dataset-specific sensitivity in temporal scales, where CCD and DoTA perform better at higher temporal scales, while DAD performs best at two temporal scales.
Impact of decomposition window size.
Figure
A2
(e) examines the effect of the decomposition window size (
k
k
) in the temporal modeling of our method.
While the plot indicates high resilience of model performance to changes in window size, we observe that temporal smoothing improves performance compared to no smoothing (
k
=
1
k=1
). The optimal window size varies:
k
=
7
k=7
for CCD,
k
=
15
k=15
for DoTA, and
k
=
3
k=3
for DAD, highlighting dataset-specific sensitivities to smoothing.
A.3.3 Non-stationarity
We conduct an extensive study to validate the presence of non-stationarity in the datasets and further assess the impact
of attenuating the non-stationarity caused by statistical moments (mean and variance).
First, we leverage pretrained frozen CLIP-ViT
[
37
]
to extract frame-level embeddings. Next, we treat these embeddings as multivariate time-series and use the Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF)
[
41
]
and the KPSS
[
21
]
tests to determine their non-stationarity.
These tests provide both a test statistic and a
p
-value, allowing us to assess the presence of non-stationarity from complementary perspectives.
As observed in Table
A2
, all three datasets exhibit an ADF
p
-value
≥
0.05
\geq 0.05
and a KPSS
p
-value
<
0.05
<0.05
, indicating strong evidence of non-stationarity in the extracted time-series.
Next, we intend to evaluate if the normalization module in the Non-stationarity Modeling component of our method has been successful in stationarizing the embedded video frames.
Table
A2
shows the results of the stationarity tests on the previously used CLIP embeddings, this time after applying the same normalization step used in our model.
We observe lower ADF and higher KPSS
p
-values, which point to an increased amount of stationarity, indicating that our method successfully reduces non-stationarity in the embeddings, thus allowing for better TTC forecasting with transformers.
A.3.4 Visualization of trend and seasonality
To gain deeper insights into the underlying trend and seasonality components of the video frame embeddings, we employ a pre-trained image autoencoder
[
53
]
to reconstruct these components, as shown in Figure
A3
. The figure illustrates two samples, (a) with a static background, and (b) with a dynamic background. We observe that in both samples, the trend component predominantly captures the background and the overall motion flow of objects, while the seasonality component emphasizes short-range and finer details, such as vehicles and traffic signs. This example highlights our method’s ability to effectively disentangle trend and seasonality components, as further supported by the ablation study, where their removal significantly impacts TTC forecasting performance.
(a)
Static background
(b)
Dynamic background
Figure A3
:
Auto-encoder reconstruction of trend and seasonality components in (
a
) static background and (
b
) dynamic background.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA