VLTI-GRAVITY measurements of cool evolved stars: II. Pulsation properties and mass-loss process of the Mira star R Car and the red supergiant VX SgrBased on observations made with the Very Large Telescope Interferometer (VLTI) at the Paranal Observatory under programs ID 0100.D-0835(C, F), 0101.D-0616(A), 0102.D-0197(A), 0103.D-0245(A, B, C), 105.207Y(002, 003, 004) and 115.27VK.001.
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
2
Observations and data reduction
2.1
Observations
2.2
Data Reduction
2.3
Complementary data
3
Results
3.1
Qualitative description
3.2
Spectral selection of the squared visibilities
3.2.1
Continuum
3.2.2
Titanium
I
& Scandium
I
atomic lines
3.2.3
Water molecular bands
3.2.4
Carbon monoxide molecular bands
3.3
Angular diameters
3.4
Variability
3.4.1
R Car
3.4.2
VX Sgr
4
Comparison to the CO5BOLD simulation
4.1
Extracting interferometric observables
4.2
AGB model
5
Discussion
5.1
Comparison to other works
5.2
Great Dimming of VX Sgr?
6
Conclusions
Acknowledgements
References
A
Observing logs
B
Full VLTI dataset of R Car
C
Full VLTI dataset of VX Sgr
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2604.21621v1 [astro-ph.SR] 23 Apr 2026
1
1
institutetext:
Department of Theoretical Physics and Astrophysics, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kotlářská 2, 611 37, Brno, Czech Republic
1
1
email:
jadlovsky@mail.muni.cz
2
2
institutetext:
European Southern Observatory (ESO), Karl-Schwarzschild Str. 2, D-85748, Garching bei München, Germany
3
3
institutetext:
Université Côte d’Azur, Observatoire de la Côte d’Azur (OCA), CNRS, Lagrange, CS 34229, 06304, Nice Cedex 4, France
4
4
institutetext:
Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics (MPE), Giessenbachstrasse 1, D-85748, Garching bei München, Germany
5
5
institutetext:
Theoretical Astrophysics, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Box 516, SE-751 20 Uppsala, Sweden
6
6
institutetext:
Schmidt Sciences, New York, USA
7
7
institutetext:
National Science Foundation, 2415 Eisenhower Avenue, Alexandria, Virginia 22314, USA
8
8
institutetext:
Charles University, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Institute of Astronomy, V Holešovičkách 2, 18000, Prague, Czech Republic
9
9
institutetext:
Leibniz-Institut für Astrophysik Potsdam (AIP),
An der Sternwarte 16, D-14482 Potsdam, Germany
VLTI-GRAVITY measurements of cool evolved stars: II.
Pulsation properties and mass-loss process of the Mira star R Car and the red supergiant VX Sgr
†
†
thanks:
Based on observations made with the Very Large Telescope Interferometer (VLTI) at the Paranal Observatory under programs ID 0100.D-0835(C, F), 0101.D-0616(A), 0102.D-0197(A), 0103.D-0245(A, B, C), 105.207Y(002, 003, 004) and 115.27VK.001.
Daniel Jadlovský
Markus Wittkowski
Andrea Chiavassa
Kateryna Kravchenko
Bernd Freytag
Susanne Höfner
Jiří Krtička
Claudia Paladini
Gioia Rau
Miroslav Brož
Thomas Granzer
Michael Weber
Abstract
Aims.
The mass-loss process of red supergiant (RSG) and asymptotic giant branch (AGB) stars and its relation to variability are poorly constrained. We aim to study the photosphere and near-surface atmospheric structure, where the mass-loss is initiated. For this purpose, we study two oxygen-rich evolved stars, the Mira-type AGB star R Car and the RSG VX Sgr.
Methods.
We use the VLTI-GRAVITY instrument operating in the near-infrared
K
K
-band. Our sample comprises 54 VLTI-GRAVITY snapshots (18 R Car, 36 VX Sgr) taken over about 7 years, being the largest VLTI time-series dataset to date. We determine the angular diameter as a function of time for the continuum (photosphere) and selected atomic and molecular bands, i.e. lines of Ti
i
and Sc
i
, and bands of H
2
O and CO. Furthermore, we compare the variability and atmospheric structure to state-of-the-art radiative-hydrodynamics CO5BOLD 3D simulations.
Results.
The radii of photosphere (
R
⋆
R_{\star}
) and extended atmospheric layers are variable and relate to the light curve with phase shifts.
The near-photospheric layers show a maximum radius near visual brightness minima (
ϕ
vis
∼
0.4
−
0.6
\phi_{\rm vis}\sim 0.4-0.6
). Inner atomic (Ti
i
, Sc
i
) and molecular (H
2
O) layers are further phase-shifted
by
Δ
​
ϕ
vis
∼
0.05
\Delta\phi_{\rm vis}\sim 0.05
. The more extended CO layers show longer, irregular periods and
maximum extensions of
∼
1.3
−
1.7
​
R
⋆
\sim 1.3-1.7\>R_{\star}
for R Car, and of
∼
1.5
−
2.2
​
R
⋆
\sim 1.5-2.2\>R_{\star}
for VX Sgr. Comparison with synthetic interferometric data of an AGB model based on several pulsation cycles in CO5BOLD simulations revealed a similar behavior. The photosphere shows regular pulsations, but with maximum diameters preceding minimum brightness (
ϕ
vis
<
0.5
\phi_{\rm vis}<0.5
). The H
2
O layer showed a much weaker extension compared to our observations, while CO showed a good agreement. Furthermore, during the 2020-2021 season, VX Sgr exhibited an extreme mass-loss event similar to that of Betelgeuse, preceded by two strong shocks and culminating with the extreme expansion of H
2
O and CO layers, both up to
∼
2.2
​
R
⋆
\sim 2.2\>R_{\star}
. Unexpectedly, during this event, we also detected Brackett
γ
\gamma
in interferometric data, as well as strong Balmer emission in optical spectra, both of which are also signatures of a shock propagating through the atmosphere.
Conclusions.
The Mira R Car showed an estimated photospheric radius
R
⋆
=
280
±
25
​
R
⊙
R_{\star}=280\pm 25\>\rm R_{\odot}
, with a regular fundamental mode (FM) pulsation amplitude
∼
13
%
\sim 13\%
of
R
⋆
R_{\star}
. During its active cycle, the extreme RSG VX Sgr showed
R
⋆
=
1556
±
110
​
R
⊙
R_{\star}=1556\pm 110\>\rm R_{\odot}
with FM pulsation amplitude
∼
13
%
\sim 13\%
of
R
⋆
R_{\star}
, the same as R Car. During its quiescent cycle, it showed a smaller
R
⋆
=
1456
±
108
​
R
⊙
R_{\star}=1456\pm 108\>\rm R_{\odot}
and low-amplitude pulsations near the first overtone (O1), only
∼
4
%
\sim 4\%
of
R
⋆
R_{\star}
.
This supports a steady mass-loss process for Miras related to stable, large-amplitude FM pulsation, whereas the mass-loss process for RSGs may be dominated by extreme events connected to changes in the pulsation mode from low-amplitude O1 to large-amplitude FM pulsations.
Key Words.:
stars: supergiants – stars: atmospheres – stars: mass-loss – shock waves – techniques: interferometric
1
Introduction
Red supergiants (RSG) and red giants on the asymptotic giant branch (AGB) experience significant mass loss and are thus some of the main contributors to dust production in the interstellar medium
(e.g., Tielens
2005
; van Loon
et al.
2005
; Levesque
2017
; Chiavassa
et al.
2024
)
. From the evolutionary point of view, these groups of evolved stars are quite different - AGBs are low- and intermediate-mass stars, whereas RSGs are massive stars that will evolve towards core-collapse supernovae (SN). On the other hand, from the observational point of view, these groups of evolved stars share many similar characteristics, such as variability, high mass-loss rates, and extended atmospheres
(e.g., Arroyo-Torres
et al.
2015
; Chiavassa
et al.
2024
)
. The mass-loss rates range from
4
×
10
−
8
4\times 10^{-8}
to
8
×
10
−
5
​
M
⊙
​
yr
−
1
8\times 10^{-5}\>\rm M_{\odot}\,yr^{-1}
for the Mira-type AGB stars, while for the more massive RSGs the range is from
2
×
10
−
7
2\times 10^{-7}
to
3
×
10
−
4
​
M
⊙
​
yr
−
1
3\times 10^{-4}\>\rm M_{\odot}\,yr^{-1}
(e.g., De Beck
et al.
2010
)
. However, despite the importance of the mass loss from the cool evolved stars to the chemical evolution of the Universe, we still do not have a comprehensive understanding of all the physical processes that come into play
(Chiavassa
et al.
2024
)
, especially for the RSGs.
For Mira-type AGB stars, the mass-loss mechanism is better understood. They are radial fundamental-mode pulsators
(Wood
et al.
1999
; Wood
2000
)
with regular large-amplitude changes in brightness, up to several mag in band
V
V
. In this case, the mass loss triggered by pulsation and convection would be the most effective. Pulsation and large-scale convective flows levitate the material to a distance far enough from the star, where the cooler extended atmosphere allows for molecule and dust formation. Subsequently, the radiation pressure on dust grains becomes effective and drags the gas, driving the mass loss
(Woitke
2006
; Höfner and Olofsson
2018
; Bladh
et al.
2019
; Freytag and Höfner
2023
)
. For carbon-rich (C/O
>
1
>1
) AGB stars, the wind is driven by amorphous carbon, whereas for the oxygen-rich (C/O
<
1
<1
) stars, the wind is driven by silicate grains
(Höfner
et al.
2022
)
. Dynamic 1D CODEX self-excited pulsation models for Mira variables have shown that pulsations of the photosphere are quite regular and generate global shocks, but that with increasing distance, the variability of extended layers becomes more irregular
(Ireland
et al.
2008
,
2011b
)
. However, 3D CO5BOLD radiative hydrodynamics (RHD) simulations give us a more complex picture; while the radial pulsations of the star are present, the surface is also covered by various large-scale non-radial structures, such as the giant convective cells. The interaction between convection and pulsation generates large-scale shocks, resulting in increasingly patchy and clumpy structures in the extended atmosphere and the dust formation zone
(Freytag
et al.
2017
; Höfner and Freytag
2019
; Freytag and Höfner
2023
)
. Observationally, the presence of extended atmospheres up to several stellar radii (
R
⋆
R_{\star}
) have been confirmed for AGBs
(e.g., Mennesson
et al.
2002
; Ohnaka
et al.
2005
; Wittkowski
et al.
2018
)
, as well as the various large-scale structures on the surface
(e.g., Paladini
et al.
2018
; Vlemmings
et al.
2024
)
.
The same mechanism appears less effective for RSGs (as well as for semi-regular AGB stars). There, the variability is more complex, consisting of several modes, such as pulsations in higher overtones and Long Secondary Periods
(LSP, Wood
et al.
1999
; Kiss
et al.
2006
; Wood and Nicholls
2009
)
, resulting in smaller brightness amplitudes and irregular variability. Recently, it has been shown that LSP photometric variations may be caused by low-mass companions
(Decin
et al.
2025
)
, as evidenced for Betelgeuse
(Goldberg
et al.
2024
; MacLeod
et al.
2025
; Howell
et al.
2025
; Dupree
et al.
2026
)
. Based on 1D and 3D dynamical models of RSGs,
Arroyo-Torres
et al.
(
2015
)
and
Wittkowski
et al.
(
2016
)
suggested that pulsation and convection in these stars, based on current models, are not effective enough to lift the atmosphere to such a distance where dust could form. Nonetheless, comparable extended atmospheres and large-scale surface structures as for AGBs were also observationally confirmed for RSGs using interferometry
(e.g., Haubois
et al.
2009
; Chiavassa
et al.
2010
; Arroyo-Torres
et al.
2013
; Wittkowski
et al.
2017
; Climent
et al.
2020
; Chiavassa
et al.
2022
; González-Torà
et al.
2024
)
, while the extended atmospheres of RSGs were also recently directly imaged by
Guarcello
et al.
(
2025
)
using JWST. Narrow line emission components in the first days of Type II SN explosion also further prove the existence of dense circumstellar medium (CSM) around RSGs
(e.g., Fransson
et al.
2014
)
, as well as of enhanced mass loss of RSG before the SN
(e.g., Jacobson-Galán
et al.
2022
)
. Additionally, empirical extended atmospheres added to 1D MARCS models showed good agreement with interferometric observations
(Davies and Plez
2021
; González-Torà
et al.
2023
,
2024
)
. Taken together, these findings indicate a missing physics in our current understanding of the RSG winds, namely, how the mass-loss process is triggered in the near-surface regions and how the material is levitated to form the observed extended atmospheres. Alternative mass-loss mechanisms were proposed, such as radiative pressure on molecular lines
(Josselin and Plez
2007
)
. The recent event of the Great Dimming of Betelgeuse
(Guinan
et al.
2020
; Levesque and Massey
2020
; Dupree
et al.
2020
; Dharmawardena
et al.
2020
; Montargès
et al.
2021
; Taniguchi
et al.
2022
)
indicates that episodic mass-loss events could be the missing component to our understanding the mass-loss process of RSGs
(Dupree
et al.
2022
; Humphreys and Jones
2022
)
. In particular, powerful shocks propagating through the photosphere on a timescale of a few weeks were associated with this mass ejection
(Kravchenko
et al.
2021
; Jadlovský
et al.
2024
)
. Recently,
Freytag
et al.
(
2024
)
demonstrated, using their CO5BOLD simulations, that RSGs may irregularly show dimming events due to obscuration by patches of cool gas, while for AGBs, this behavior is characteristic of their pulsation cycles.
To date, not many interferometric studies have been able to analyze the temporal variability of extended atmospheric layers of cool evolved stars.
Thompson
et al.
(
2002
)
was one of the first to analyze the near-infrared (IR) variability of extended layers of two Mira variables, RZ Peg and S Lac, using the Palomar Testbed Interferometer (PTI). Later,
Thompson
et al.
(
2003
)
presented results for many more Mira stars and found different pulsation properties for oxygen and carbon-rich stars. The full PTI sample consists of about 100 Mira stars, observed during 1998-2008. Recently, analysis of the full sample,
Mira Reference Dataset
, was resumed by
Baylis-Aguirre
et al.
(
2024
)
, who reported systematic phase shifts of the continuum and molecular bands with respect to the visual light curve. Meanwhile,
Wittkowski
et al.
(
2018
, Paper I)
used the VLTI and the GRAVITY instrument to study the variability of the atmospheric extension for a Mira-type star R Peg over one pulsation cycle, and found that the maximum radius of continuum and H
2
O layers were anti-correlated with the light curve, while the CO layers were correlated.
Rosales-Guzmán
et al.
(
2023
,
2024
)
studied the variability of surface features of R Car and found that substructures are correlated with the pulsation phase. Until now, no similar study was done for RSGs, apart from
GRAVITY Collaboration
et al.
(
2021
)
. They analyzed GCIRS 7, a RSG in the Galactic center, and demonstrated that RSGs also show significant diameter variations of the photosphere and molecular layers.
In this work, we analyze the largest sample of spectro-interferometric VLTI-GRAVITY observations of cool evolved stars to date. We study the relation of the extended atmosphere to the pulsation cycle. We aim at comparing a time-series of the spatially-resolved variability of an AGB and an RSG star, to better understand similarities and differences between cool evolved stars of different types at the onset of the mass-loss process close to the stellar surface. We also compare these observations to the most recent state-of-the-art 3D dynamical models
(Ahmad
et al.
2023
)
. The first object is the oxygen-rich AGB star R Car, which is a typical M-type Mira variable, with strong single-mode pulsations and amplitude of brightness variations of
Δ
​
m
V
∼
7.4
​
mag
\Delta m_{V}\>\rm\sim 7.4\>\rm mag
(Rosales-Guzmán
et al.
2024
)
. The second object is RSG VX Sgr, an extreme RSG exhibiting irregular variability, with a longer period during active cycles and a shorter period during quiescent cycles
(Tabernero
et al.
2021
)
. While its large peak-to-peak amplitude of brightness variations up to
Δ
​
m
V
∼
6
​
mag
\Delta m_{V}\>\rm\sim 6\>\rm mag
during its active cycles resembles a Mira variability
(Lockwood and Wing
1982
)
, it is rather a massive supergiant experiencing an extensive mass-loss
(Gail
et al.
2020
)
. It has also been hypothesized to be a super-AGB star or Thorne–Żytkow object
(T
Z
˙
\rm\dot{Z}
O), Tabernero
et al.
2021
; O’Grady
et al.
2026
)
. In Table
1
, we list fundamental parameters of our objects from the literature. Neither of our targets is reported to show the LSP.
The present paper is structured as follows. In Sect.
2
, we describe our dataset and data reduction methods. In Sect.
3
, we present our results on the variability of the photosphere and extended atmosphere, whereas in Sect.
4
, we compare this to similar features from state-of-the-art 3D RHD dynamical models. In Sect.
5
, we discuss implications of our results, and then in Sect.
6
, we summarize our findings.
Table 1:
Fundamental physical parameters
1
1
1
AAVSO - American Association of Variable Star Observers, 1 -
Samus’
et al.
(
2017
)
, 2 -
Vogt
et al.
(
2016
)
, 3 -
McDonald
et al.
(
2012
)
, 4 -
Groenewegen
et al.
(
1999
)
, 5 -
Whitelock
et al.
(
2008
)
, 6 -
Gaia Collaboration
et al.
(
2021
)
, 7 -
Takeuti
et al.
(
2013
)
, 8 -
Scicluna
et al.
(
2022
)
, 9 -
Tabernero
et al.
(
2021
)
, 10 -
Lockwood and Wing (
1982
)
, 11 -
Kiss
et al.
(
2006
)
, 12 -
Xu
et al.
(
2018
)
, 13 -
Mauron and Josselin (
2011
)
, 14 -
Arroyo-Torres
et al.
(
2015
)
Parameter
R Car (Mira)
VX Sgr (RSG)
References
Sp. type
M5-M8
M3-M8
Δ
​
m
V
​
[
mag
]
\Delta m_{V}\>\rm[mag]
∼
\sim
7.4
∼
\sim
6.0
AAVSO
m
K
​
[
mag
]
m_{K}\>\rm[mag]
-1.23
-0.17
5
P
​
[
d
]
P\>\rm[d]
304-314
754
±
56
\pm 56
1, 2, 5 - 11
d
​
[
pc
]
d\>\rm[pc]
182
±
16
\pm 16
1560
±
110
1560\pm 110
6 - 12
T
eff
​
[
K
]
T_{\rm eff}\>\rm[K]
2800-3100
2900-3700
3, 7 - 9, 10
log
⁡
(
L
/
L
⊙
)
\log(L/\rm L_{\odot})
∼
3.7
\sim 3.7
∼
5.3
\sim 5.3
4,7 - 12
R
⋆
​
[
R
⊙
]
R_{\star}\>\rm[R_{\odot}]
240
−
33
+
38
{}^{+38}_{-33}
1350–1940
7 - 10
M
​
[
M
⊙
]
M\>\rm[M_{\odot}]
0.87
−
0.31
+
0.47
{}^{+0.47}_{-0.31}
10-40
7 - 9, 14
M
˙
​
[
M
⊙
​
yr
−
1
]
\dot{M}\>\rm[M_{\odot}\,yr^{-1}]
1.6
×
10
−
9
1.6\times 10^{-9}
2
×
10
−
5
2\times 10^{-5}
4, 8 - 13
2
Observations and data reduction
2.1
Observations
We used near-IR spectro-interferometric observations from 2018 to 2025 for our two targets, obtained with the VLTI-GRAVITY instrument
(GRAVITY Collaboration
et al.
2017
)
, namely 18 observations for R Car and 36 for VX Sgr. The instrument operates in the near-IR
K
K
-band (
2.0
−
2.4
​
μ
​
m
2.0-2.4\>\rm\mu m
) and we employed the high spectral-resolution mode (
R
∼
4000
R\sim 4000
). Tables
5
and
6
list the VLTI observations of R Car and VX Sgr, respectively. A major part of the data originates from our time-series monitoring programmes (105.207Y, PI: Wittkowski and 115.27VK, PI: Jadlovský), and the remaining data consists of archival data from other programmes (0100.D-0835, PI: Sanchez, 0101.D-0616, PI: Wittkowski, 0102.D-0197, PI: Wittkowskki, and 0103.D-0245, PI: Kravchenko).
For each of our science observations, we took two observations of an interferometric calibrator (CAL-SCI-CAL sequence), which improves the quality of visibility calibration. The majority of the older archival data were taken in the CAL-SCI sequence, therefore, they had only one calibrator. The details about the calibrators are listed in Table
7
. As our targets are bright, all the data were taken in split polarization mode to increase the internal fringe contrast.
For all the observations, we used the small configuration (stations A0-B2-D0-C1) of the four Auxiliary Telescopes (ATs), resulting in baseline lengths between about
11.3
​
m
11.3\>\rm m
and
33.9
​
m
33.9\>\rm m
. The choice of the VLTI-AT configuration was driven by our observing strategy, which is focused on the variability of our targets at scales of the overall stellar diameter. For this purpose, the most suitable are spatial frequencies within the first lobe of the visibility function. Since our targets have a large angular diameter of
∼
10
​
mas
\sim 10\>\rm mas
, the small configuration allows us to study the relevant spatial frequencies. The higher spatial frequencies (larger configurations) would be sensitive to substructures of the stellar disk, which is not the focus of this work.
2.2
Data Reduction
We downloaded the raw data from the ESO archive and processed it using the
ESO Reflex
workflow for VLTI-GRAVITY in its version 1.6.7
2
2
2
https://www.eso.org/sci/software/pipelines/gravity/gravity-pipe-recipes.html
.
First, we used the
gravity_wkf
workflow to reduce the raw data of our science target and its calibrator(s). The calibrators were chosen as stars with a well-known angular diameter (based on
Bourges
et al.
2017
, see Table
7
) and, thus, well-known visibility, allowing us to calibrate the visibility of our science targets. Our targets require short exposures (as they are bright), allowing for several objects and sky observations to be taken as part of a single observing block. Therefore, apart from the default settings in
gravity_wkf
, we also used
average-vis
and
average-sky
to average object and sky observations.
For the reduced data, we used
gravity_viscal
to calibrate the visibility of the science target using the visibility of the calibrator(s). This allowed us to obtain the final calibrated science visibility. The formal visibility errors included in the data are small (
σ
rel
≲
0.002
\sigma_{\rm rel}\lesssim 0.002
). For each observation with 2 calibrators (
CAL
1
\rm CAL_{1}
and
CAL
2
\rm CAL_{2}
), we estimated realistic uncertainties by determining the relative error from the difference in the visibility transfer function of the calibrators as
(
|
TF
1
−
TF
2
|
)
/
(
TF
1
+
TF
2
)
\rm(|TF_{1}-TF_{2}|)/(TF_{1}+TF_{2})
, yielding
σ
rel
∼
0.01
−
0.05
\sigma_{\rm rel}\sim 0.01-0.05
for different observations. The errors were quadratically added to the errors in the original data. For observations taken with only one calibrator, we used the average error value from the epochs with 2 calibrators. The split polarization mode produces two sets of visibility data for each baseline, which we averaged for the final analysis. Fringe-tracking was performed on-axis; thus, the dataset also includes the low-resolution observations of the science target from the fringe tracker (FT).
We calibrated the wavelength scale in our data using a telluric model produced with the SkyCalc tool
3
3
3
https://www.eso.org/observing/etc/bin/gen/form?INS.MODE=swspectr+INS.NAME=SKYCALC
(Noll
et al.
2012
; Jones
et al.
2013
)
. This resulted in an average shift of about
∼
−
11
​
Å
\sim-11\rm\>\AA
for the observations taken before the GRAVITY spectral grism change in October 2019, and a shift of
∼
−
6.5
​
Å
\sim-6.5\rm\>\AA
for the newer data. Then, we also calibrated the flux. We used the MARCS stellar atmosphere models
(Gustafsson
et al.
2008
)
to calibrate the flux of calibrators. The obtained spectral transfer function was used to calibrate the flux of our science targets. The parameters of synthetic MARCS spectra used for each calibrator are listed in Table
7
. All calibrated spectro-interferometric data are plotted in Appendices
B
and
C
, including the FT data. In all the data, the FT data agree with the science data, confirming the high accuracy of the absolute visibility calibration.
2.3
Complementary data
We used visual and
V
V
light curves of R Car and VX Sgr from the American Association of Variable Star Observers (AAVSO
4
4
4
https://www.aavso.org
). This allowed us to establish the period phase for each epoch (with
ϕ
vis
=
0
\phi_{\rm vis}=0
at maximum visible brightness). Additionally, to further discuss the unusual variability of VX Sgr (see Sect.
5
), we also compared it to optical spectra from the STELLA telescope
(Strassmeier
et al.
2004
; Weber
et al.
2012
,
2008
)
. We used the radial velocity data from STELLA, namely from observations between 2016-2021 (PI: Dorda) and 2024-2025 (PI: Jadlovský).
Lastly, for converting the determined diameters from angular units to physical size, for R Car, we adopt the distance
d
d
of
182
±
16
​
pc
182\pm 16\>\rm pc
(Gaia Collaboration
et al.
2021
)
. For VX Sgr, distances determined based on
Gaia
measurements have a large uncertainty. Fortunately, VX Sgr is a strong maser source; therefore, there are more precise measurements of distance based on masers available. Namely,
1.57
±
0.27
​
kpc
1.57\pm 0.27\>\rm kpc
(Chen
et al.
2007
)
or
1.56
±
0.11
​
kpc
1.56\pm 0.11\>\rm kpc
(Xu
et al.
2018
)
. We adopt the latter, more precise value.
Figure 1:
Examples of the calibrated flux (averaged for four ATs), the squared visibility amplitude
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
(averaged for both polarizations), and the closure phase as a function of the wavelength for both our targets at representative dates. The flux was calibrated using the spectral transfer function of the calibrators. The
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
dataset consists of six projected baselines
B
B
, while closure phase consists of four baseline triplets, shown for the longest baseline in the triplet
B
max
B_{\rm max}
.
Upper three panels:
R Car,
Lower three panels:
VX Sgr.
3
Results
3.1
Qualitative description
We begin with a qualitative description of the interferometric dataset. Figure
1
shows an example of a typical calibrated flux, squared visibility amplitude (
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
), and closure phases plotted versus wavelength for each of our two science targets. The first and fourth panels of Fig.
1
show that the calibrated flux of both our targets, the Mira-variable R Car and the RSG VX Sgr, are similar and typical of other oxygen-rich AGBs and RSGs
(e.g., Lançon and Wood
2000
; Lançon
et al.
2007
)
. Both our targets have the peak flux near the continuum-dominated middle of the passband at
2.2
​
μ
​
m
2.2\>\rm\mu m
. The flux decreases towards both sides of the passband, below
2.1
​
μ
​
m
2.1\>\rm\mu m
due to the absorption bands of H
2
O, and above
2.3
​
μ
​
m
2.3\>\rm\mu m
due to the strong absorption bands of CO, as well as weaker bands of H
2
O. In Figs.
2
and
3
, we show the flux variability, for the full spectrum, as well as for molecular bands of CO. For R Car, we see anti-correlated behavior for CO and H
2
O - the CO absorption is the strongest during the brightness maximum (
ϕ
vis
∼
0
\phi_{\rm vis}\sim 0
), while it is the weakest for H
2
O, sometimes with peak flux shifted to
∼
2.1
​
μ
​
m
\sim 2.1\>\rm\mu m
(due to the higher
T
eff
T_{\rm eff}
, possibly indicating thermal destruction of H
2
O molecules near the maximum brightness). The opposite situation is reached during the brightness minimum (
ϕ
vis
∼
0.5
\phi_{\rm vis}\sim 0.5
), when the absorption in H
2
O becomes stronger. A similar behavior can be seen for VX Sgr, but it shows more complicated variability. The spectra of R Car show the emergence of hydrogen Brackett
γ
\gamma
(Br
γ
\gamma
) emission (
2.167
​
μ
​
m
2.167\rm\>\mu m
) before the brightness maximum (
ϕ
vis
=
0.7
−
1.0
\phi_{\rm vis}=0.7-1.0
). For some Miras, hydrogen emission is known to appear as part of their pulsation cycle before the maximum brightness, due to propagation of shocks through the atmosphere, although it is usually observed for Balmer and Paschen series
(e.g., Fox
et al.
1984
; Lançon and Wood
2000
; Fabas
et al.
2011
)
.
Likewise, the squared visibility amplitude (
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
) in the second and fifth panel of Fig.
1
shows similar features as observed for other oxygen-rich Mira-variables and RSG stars
(e.g., Perrin
et al.
2004
; Arroyo-Torres
et al.
2015
; Wittkowski
et al.
2018
; González-Torà
et al.
2024
)
. There is a maximum of
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
near the continuum-dominated region
∼
2.2
​
μ
​
m
\sim 2.2\>\rm\mu m
, which would correspond to the smallest angular diameters, i.e., the closest to the photosphere.
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
drops to lower values at wavelengths corresponding to H
2
O bands and even more significantly at CO bands. VX Sgr also shows more prominent atomic features extended with respect to the continuum, as has been shown by, for example,
Chiavassa
et al.
(
2010
)
. Brackett
γ
\gamma
is not detected in interferometric data for R Car.
In the third and sixth panel of Fig.
1
, we also show closure phases, even though they are not directly used in our analysis, and we discuss them only qualitatively. They show quite significant variations at most dates, at wavelengths corresponding to H
2
O bands, but especially at those of CO bands. This could suggest substructures within the overall structure or asymmetries due to spatially localized outflows.
Nonetheless, this is primarily caused by the fact that at some baselines in the triplet, the star is already quite resolved. Indeed, by comparing the longest baseline in the triplet (
B
max
B_{\rm max}
) for VX Sgr in the sixth panel of Fig.
1
, the two triplets with shorter
B
max
B_{\rm max}
do not show a large deviation from
0
​
deg
0\>\rm\deg
.
At a few dates, the molecular bands also become more resolved and reach the first null point of the visibility function at the longest baselines, thus the closure phase changes from
0
​
deg
0\deg
to
180
​
deg
180\deg
, while the signal of possible asymmetries or substructures would be enhanced.
Figure 2:
Variability of the flux (calibrated using the spectral transfer function) for all our observations. The spectra were divided by mean flux in the continuum region (
2.22
−
2.28
​
μ
​
m
2.22-2.28\rm\>\mu m
). Spectral regions analyzed in this work are highlighted.
Upper panel:
R Car, vertically shifted and ordered by
ϕ
vis
\phi_{\rm vis}
. Colored based on phase (
ϕ
vis
=
0
\phi_{\rm vis}=0
corresponds to brightness maximum).
Lower panel:
The same, but for VX Sgr, vertically shifted and ordered by the date of observations. Colored based on the nearest
m
vis
m_{\rm vis}
values from AAVSO.
Figure 3:
Same as Fig.
2
, but zoomed at CO molecular bands (2-0, 3-1). The spectra show deeper CO absorption near brightness maxima.
Upper panel:
R Car.
Lower panel:
VX Sgr.
3.2
Spectral selection of the squared visibilities
The main objective of our work is to study the overall variability of the atmospheric extension of distinct spectral features in the
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
data. In the following subsections, we describe in more detail the selected atomic and molecular features, and we give their overview in Table
2
.
A similar approach was used in several previous works, e.g.,
Wittkowski
et al.
(
2018
); Arroyo-Torres
et al.
(
2015
); González-Torà
et al.
(
2024
)
, while probably the most detailed work was done by
Kravchenko
et al.
(
2020
, hereafter
K20
)
. They used the tomographic method to study lines forming in given ranges of optical depths in the atmosphere. They used the VLTI-AMBER instrument
(Petrov
et al.
2007
)
in its high-resolution mode (
R
∼
12 000
R\sim 12\,000
), which had three times the resolving power of VLTI-GRAVITY (
R
∼
4000
R\sim 4000
). Therefore, they could also resolve weaker atomic lines than in this work.
3.2.1
Continuum
To study the variability of the photosphere, we selected the region of the
K
K
band without strong atomic lines or molecular bands, dominated primarily by the continuum. The region best suitable for this is between
2.22
−
2.28
​
μ
​
m
2.22-2.28\>\rm\mu m
.
K20
showed that the strongest features contributing in this region consisted of Ca
i
, Si
i
, and Fe
i
atomic lines and weak molecular bands of CN, all corresponding to the innermost layer of the atmosphere. However, the resolution of VLTI-GRAVITY is not sufficient to resolve these atomic and molecular features. Therefore, to calculate the angular diameter of the continuum
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
, which corresponds to the stellar photosphere, we make an average of
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
in this region, using only
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
larger than its median as an arbitrary threshold to remove contributions by slightly extended atomic and molecular features.
3.2.2
Titanium
I
& Scandium
I
atomic lines
The strongest atomic features in our data are the lines of Ti
i
and Sc
i
. These lines belong to an intermediate layer of atmosphere in
K20
, forming above the continuum. Indeed,
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
in these lines significantly drops compared to the continuum, especially for VX Sgr. Therefore, we analyzed these lines separately from the continuum. To determine the angular diameter of these atomic layers
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}
, we take the minimum
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
value of each line.
3.2.3
Water molecular bands
The part of the spectrum that is the most dominated by the H
2
O molecular bands is located between
1.97
−
2.05
​
μ
​
m
1.97-2.05\>\rm\mu m
. However, it consists of many weaker H
2
O bands, and therefore, the resolution is not sufficient to determine specific band heads. Thus, to determine the angular diameter
θ
H
2
​
O
\theta_{\rm H_{2}O}
in this region, we make an average of
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
values lower than the median as an arbitrary threshold. Some H
2
O bands were also part of the intermediate atmospheric layer by
K20
, but from our data, it is clear that the H
2
O molecular bands form above the atomic layer of Ti
i
and Sc
i
, therefore, we analyze these features separately. Some H
2
O molecular bands also form above
>
2.3
​
μ
​
m
>2.3\>\rm\mu m
, monotonically decreasing the visibility function in between the CO band heads. In this work, we focus only on the H
2
O bands below
<
2.05
​
μ
​
m
<2.05\>\rm\mu m
.
3.2.4
Carbon monoxide molecular bands
The most prominent features in
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
data are the CO molecular bands, which represent consistently the most extended layers. The same was the case in
K20
, where their most extended layer consisted solely of CO bands. We can resolve specific molecular band heads of
12
C
16
O corresponding to vibrational transitions
v
=
2
−
0
​
(
first overtone
)
,
3
−
1
,
4
−
2
v=2-0\>(\text{\rm first overtone}),3-1,4-2
, and
5
−
3
5-3
. We can also resolve the overtones for the isotopologues
13
C
16
O and
12
C
18
O, while the overtone of the isotopologue
12
C
17
O is blended with the
v
=
3
−
1
v=3-1
transition of
12
C
16
O. We focus on the transitions of
12
C
16
O, which are the strongest features. To determine the angular diameters
θ
CO
​
(
2
−
0
)
,
θ
CO
​
(
3
−
1
)
,
θ
CO
​
(
4
−
2
)
,
\theta_{\rm CO(2-0)},\theta_{\rm CO(3-1)},\theta_{\rm CO(4-2)},
and
θ
CO
​
(
5
−
3
)
\theta_{\rm CO(5-3)}
, we use the minimum
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
of each band head, i.e., the maximum extension.
Table 2:
List of wavelength regions used for our analysis, with the reference optical depth
τ
0
\tau_{0}
computed at
λ
=
5000
​
Å
\lambda=5000\>\rm\AA
from
K20
.
5
5
5
a
only selected lines in that region.
b
minimum
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
value in the band head.
c
the optical depth range corresponds to weak unresolved lines from the innermost layer from
K20
, which may contaminate our continuum.
d
the maximum extent of the atmospheric model in
K20
.
Region
Wavelength [
μ
​
m
\mu\rm m
]
log
⁡
τ
0
\log\tau_{0}
Continuum
2.22-2.28
−
0.65
<
log
⁡
τ
0
≲
0.25
c
-0.65<\log\tau_{0}\lesssim 0.25^{{c}}
T
​
i
​
i
{Ti\textsc{i}}
and
S
​
c
​
i
{Sc\textsc{i}}
2.18-2.22
a
−
1.75
<
log
⁡
τ
0
<
−
1.00
-1.75<\log\tau_{0}<-1.00
H
2
O
1.98-2.05
−
1.75
<
log
⁡
τ
0
<
−
1.00
-1.75<\log\tau_{0}<-1.00
12
C
16
O (2-0)
2.29
b
−
3.00
d
<
log
⁡
τ
0
<
−
2.10
-3.00^{{d}}<\log\tau_{0}<-2.10
12
C
16
O (3-1)
2.32
b
−
3.00
d
<
log
⁡
τ
0
<
−
2.10
-3.00^{{d}}<\log\tau_{0}<-2.10
12
C
16
O (4-2)
2.35
b
−
3.00
d
<
log
⁡
τ
0
<
−
2.10
-3.00^{{d}}<\log\tau_{0}<-2.10
12
C
16
O (5-3)
2.38
b
−
3.00
d
<
log
⁡
τ
0
<
−
2.10
-3.00^{{d}}<\log\tau_{0}<-2.10
Table 3:
List of results related to the mean angular diameters and phase shifts (with respect to
ϕ
vis
\phi_{\rm vis}
) for the analyzed spectral regions, with parameters of the sine fit listed, and average values for layers with no fit.
R Car
Region
Mean angular diameter
θ
\theta
[mas]
Scaling factor
A
A
Phase shift
Δ
​
ϕ
vis
\Delta\phi_{\rm vis}
Amplitude
Δ
​
θ
\Delta\theta
[mas]
Continuum
14.33
±0.11
0.92
0.43
±0.01
1.81
T
​
i
​
i
{Ti\textsc{i}}
and
S
​
c
​
i
{Sc\textsc{i}}
16.21
±0.11
0.92
0.46
±0.01
1.51
H
2
O
17.92
±0.34
0.86
0.55
±0.05
1.51
12
C
16
O (2-0)
21.28
±0.13
0.93
-
∼
\sim
0.87
12
C
16
O (3-1)
22.20
±0.13
0.93
-
∼
\sim
1.01
12
C
16
O (4-2)
22.40
±0.11
0.90
-
∼
\sim
1.31
12
C
16
O (5-3)
22.63
±0.12
0.91
-
∼
\sim
1.46
VX Sgr (active/quiescent phase)
Region
Mean angular diameter
θ
\theta
[mas]
Scaling factor
A
A
Phase shift
Δ
​
ϕ
vis
\Delta\phi_{\rm vis}
Amplitude
Δ
​
θ
\Delta\theta
[mas]
Continuum
9.29
±0.10
/8.69
±0.09
0.74
0.56
±0.02
/ -
1.17/0.36
T
​
i
​
i
{Ti\textsc{i}}
and
S
​
c
​
i
{Sc\textsc{i}}
11.05
±0.32
/11.03
±0.09
0.72
0.61
±0.06
/ -
1.03/0.60
H
2
O
13.01
±0.60
/13.50
±0.08
0.63
0.59
±0.05
/ -
2.49/1.05
12
C
16
O (2-0)
16.38
±0.06
/17.01
±0.10
0.63
-
∼
\sim
1.30/0.65
12
C
16
O (3-1)
17.00
±0.06
/17.55
±0.12
0.61
-
∼
\sim
1.37/0.81
12
C
16
O (4-2)
17.01
±0.05
/17.57
±0.09
0.61
-
∼
\sim
1.16/1.61
12
C
16
O (5-3)
17.45
±0.06
/17.66
±0.11
0.57
-
∼
\sim
1.49/1.70
3.3
Angular diameters
Due to our strategy of acquiring a large amount of time-series data to constrain the variability at larger scales, each epoch includes data only in the first lobe of the visibility function (small VLTI-AT configuration) such that targets are moderately resolved at continuum (
|
V
|
2
>
0.2
|V|^{2}>0.2
). It is thus not possible to use a limb-darkened model, for which we would need to cover a second lobe of the visibility function (requiring a larger VLTI-AT configuration). Instead, to fit
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
, we use a simple uniform disc (UD) geometrical model, which describes well the photospheric continuum
(e.g., Wittkowski
et al.
2018
)
. However, the situation is more complicated for the visibility function of the molecular bands, which yield significantly larger UDs compared to the continuum and thus become partly resolved (
|
V
|
2
∼
0
|V|^{2}\sim 0
). At such low
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
near the first null point, the visibility function may show departures from UD and may be more sensitive to limb-darkening effects and surface substructures. To avoid these effects in our data, we use only values larger than
|
V
|
2
>
0.05
|V|^{2}>0.05
. On some dates, the molecular bands become so extended that
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
data points in some longer baselines lie below this limit. The situation is improved by binning our data in 2-week epochs (about
∼
5
%
\sim 5\%
of the pulsation period), which gives us more data points above this limit on some dates.
Another major component that affects the visibility function is the contribution from the spatially over-resolved background. The origin of this contribution is disputed
(e.g., Kluska
et al.
2019
)
. To account for this in our data, we add a scaling factor
A
A
that corresponds to the over-resolved flux in the following way
(e.g., Perrin
et al.
2007
)
:
|
V
|
model
2
​
(
A
,
ρ
,
θ
UD
)
=
A
∗
|
V
|
UD
2
​
(
ρ
,
θ
UD
)
,
|V|^{2}_{\rm model}(A,\rho,\theta_{\rm UD})=A*|V|_{\rm UD}^{2}(\rho,\theta_{\rm UD}),
(1)
where
|
V
|
model
2
​
(
A
,
ρ
,
θ
UD
)
|V|^{2}_{\rm model}(A,\rho,\theta_{\rm UD})
is the visibility function of the UD model plus the spatially over-resolved background,
ρ
\rho
is the spatial frequency
ρ
=
u
2
+
v
2
=
B
λ
\rho=\sqrt{u^{2}+v^{2}}=\frac{B}{\lambda}
,
θ
UD
\theta_{\rm UD}
is the angular diameter, and
|
V
|
UD
2
​
(
ρ
,
θ
UD
)
|V|^{2}_{\rm UD}(\rho,\theta_{\rm UD})
is the visibility function of a simple UD model, which is calculated from the first-order Bessel function
J
1
J_{1}
(e.g., Born and Wolf
1980
; Lawson
2000
)
as:
V
UD
​
(
ρ
,
θ
UD
)
=
2
​
J
1
​
(
π
,
ρ
,
θ
UD
)
π
​
ρ
​
θ
UD
.
V_{\rm UD}(\rho,\theta_{\rm UD})=2\frac{J_{1}(\pi,\rho,\theta_{\rm UD})}{\pi\rho\theta_{\rm UD}}.
(2)
We also explored the effect of varying
u
​
v
uv
coverage on the determined
θ
\theta
for all considered layers, as our observations are taken at different local sidereal times, resulting in slight variations of
ρ
\rho
. Figure
4
demonstrates that the visibility data do not show large variations and that the determined diameters during 1-2 nights fall within error bars from each other, and thus, at our angular resolution, our targets are consistent with a UD model across different directions.
Figure 4:
Examples of UD fit for observations taken within a single epoch. The fit demonstrates that the determined
θ
\theta
does not strongly depend on the
u
​
v
uv
orientation (shown as smaller plots), and the results are mostly within error bars from each other. Different colors correspond to
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
(green),
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}
(yellow) and
θ
CO
​
(
2
−
0
)
\theta_{\rm CO(2-0)}
(red). The shaded part of the graph corresponds to values below the adopted
|
V
|
2
=
0.05
|V|^{2}=0.05
limit.
Upper panel:
R Car for four observations taken on 2018-01-27, see Table
6
Upper panel:
VX Sgr for three observations taken between 2021-08-30 and 2021-08-31, see Table
5
.
To determine the angular diameter
θ
UD
\theta_{\rm UD}
and the scaling factor
A
A
at each epoch, we use the Monte-Carlo Markov chain (MCMC) algorithm
(Foreman-Mackey
et al.
2013
)
. We let 250 walkers evolve in 100 steps in each wavelength region during our epochs. Before we proceed to the final fitting, we also explored the extent of contribution of the over-resolved flux in different wavelength regions. For the Mira-variable R Car, the contribution from the over-resolved flux is small at most epochs and close to unity, with
A
>
0.85
A>0.85
(similar values for R Car in
Rosales-Guzmán
et al.
2023
). Thus, we choose to set a constant scaling
A
A
for the final fitting of R Car. The constant value of
A
A
was calculated for each wavelength region based only on epochs with more than one observation. On the other hand, for VX Sgr, the contribution from the over-resolved component is significant and shows strong variations, with
A
A
down to
∼
0.5
\sim 0.5
in some epochs. A similar contribution from a larger component was also determined in
Chiavassa
et al.
(
2010
)
. Therefore, we fit
A
A
at each epoch.
Table
3
lists the average value of
A
A
in each wavelength region, used as a constant parameter for the final fitting of R Car and as a free parameter for VX Sgr. Determined errors for
A
A
are about
∼
0.01
\sim 0.01
. In Fig.
5
, we show an example of the determined UD diameters across the entire
K
K
-band wavelength range for both of our targets, at epochs corresponding to a maximum and a minimum of
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
.
Figure 5:
Comparison between the determined wavelength-dependent angular diameters during min (red) and max (blue) photospheric radius for our two targets. The observation dates are denoted in the legend. Conversion to the physical size (right y-axis) was done using the adopted distances from Table
1
.
Upper panel:
R Car,
lower panel:
VX Sgr.
3.4
Variability
The determined angular diameters
θ
UD
\theta_{\rm UD}
and their multi-epoch variability are shown in Figs.
6
and
7
. Our results are compared to visual and
V
V
light curves from AAVSO.
Our results demonstrate the variability of continuum and molecular layers during several pulsation cycles and the relation between their variability through phase shifts. For both our targets at all epochs, the smallest angular diameters are those of continuum, and then increasing through the various atmospheric layers, i.e.,
θ
cont
<
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
<
θ
H
2
​
O
<
θ
CO
\theta_{\rm cont}<\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}<\theta_{\rm H_{2}O}<\theta_{\rm CO}
. For specific CO transitions, the situation is less clear, but at most times, layers corresponding to the highest transition also form at larger radii than the lowest transition, i.e.,
θ
CO
​
(
2
−
0
)
≲
θ
CO
​
(
5
−
3
)
\theta_{\rm CO(2-0)}\lesssim\theta_{\rm CO(5-3)}
. Meanwhile, the molecular layers are more extended for the RSG VX Sgr than for the Mira R Car relative to their photospheric diameter
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
. We defined the extension of atmospheric layers with respect to photosphere
R
⋆
R_{\star}
as
θ
layer
/
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm layer}/\theta_{\rm cont}
at a given epoch, assuming that
R
⋆
≃
R
cont
R_{\star}\simeq R_{\rm cont}
.
To estimate the mean radius of each layer, as well as the phase shift in relation to the light curve, we fitted the data with a sine curve, using the period of the light curve, similarly to Paper I. The periods are determined using the Lomb-Scargle periodogram in the
astropy
package
(Astropy Collaboration
et al.
2022
)
. We determined phase shifts only for such atmospheric layers that showed a similar period as the light curve (see Fig.
8
). The phase shifts, and mean angular diameters are listed in Table
3
. For both targets, the phase shift increases with a larger radius but becomes less regular at the most extended layers; see specific details for each target below.
3.4.1
R Car
For R Car, the period analysis is more straightforward, as the Mira variables are regular pulsators. There are slight variations in the amplitude and the length of each cycle (a few
∼
d
\sim\rm d
), but this does not significantly affect our results. We thus treat R Car as a single-mode pulsator and proceed to determine the period of pulsations. Based on the part of the AAVSO light curve covered by our VLTI observations, we derived a period of
P
2017
−
2024
∼
307.4
​
d
P_{2017-2024}\sim 307.4\>\rm d
(see Fig.
8a
), while the literature gives
P
literature
=
304
−
314
​
d
P_{\rm literature}=304-314\>\rm d
(McDonald
et al.
2012
; Samus’
et al.
2017
; Rosales-Guzmán
et al.
2023
)
. We used the derived period to study the phase shifts of the angular diameters of the continuum and the extended atmospheres with respect to the AAVSO light curve.
Based on Lomb-Scargle (LS) periodogram in Fig.
8a
, we found nearly the same periods as in the light curve for the variations of the photosphere
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
and the near-photospheric layer of
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}
(within
1
−
2
​
d
1-2\rm\>d
difference). For the more extended molecular layer
θ
H
2
​
O
\theta_{\rm H_{2}O}
, the same period is no longer the dominant one, although it is still present in the LS periodogram, while the variations still show a relation to the light curve. As a result, it is possible to determine a phase shift. For the most extended layers of
θ
CO
\theta_{\rm CO}
, similar periods as for
θ
H
2
​
O
\theta_{\rm H_{2}O}
appear in the LS periodogram, but the variations do not follow the light curve so closely,  thus it is no longer possible to find a clear phase shift. For both
θ
H
2
​
O
\theta_{\rm H_{2}O}
and
θ
CO
\theta_{\rm CO}
, longer periods become prominent in the LS periodogram. Variations of
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
show a maximum diameter near
ϕ
vis
∼
0.43
\phi_{\rm vis}\sim 0.43
, i.e., roughly anti-correlated with respect to the light curve. For the neighboring layers (
θ
cont
→
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
\theta_{\rm cont}\rightarrow\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}
and
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
→
θ
H
2
​
O
\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}\rightarrow\theta_{\rm H_{2}O}
), the phase shift increases by
Δ
​
ϕ
vis
∼
0.05
\Delta\phi_{\rm vis}\sim 0.05
, i.e., about 2-3 weeks, with increasing distance from the photosphere. The required photospheric velocity for such phase shift between, for example,
θ
cont
→
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
\theta_{\rm cont}\rightarrow\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}
would be from
15
15
to
20
​
kms
−
1
20\rm\>kms^{-1}
(for radius difference of about
∼
40
​
R
⊙
\sim 40\>\rm R_{\odot}
from Fig.
5
), which agrees with with expected values for Mira pulsators
(e.g., Scholz and Wood
2000
; Kravchenko
et al.
2018
)
.
Overall, the variations of angular diameter show a clear relation to the light curve, especially for the photosphere
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
and near-photopsheric layers
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}
, which are roughly anti-correlated to the light curve, showing a maximum diameter close to minimum brightness. The mean extension of the outermost CO layers
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
with respect to the photosphere is
∼
1.5
​
R
⋆
\sim 1.5\>R_{\star}
, but ranges between
∼
1.3
−
1.7
​
R
⋆
\sim 1.3-1.7\>R_{\star}
during pulsation cycles. Conversion to geometrical size, using the distance and its uncertainty from Table
1
, yields
R
⋆
=
280
±
25
​
R
⊙
R_{\star}=280\pm 25\>\rm R_{\odot}
(
∼
1.3
​
au
\sim 1.3\>\rm au
) for the continuum, with the pulsations amplitude of
Δ
​
R
∼
35
​
R
⊙
\Delta R\sim 35\>\rm R_{\odot}
. The mean extension of CO layers is about
∼
430
±
38
​
R
⊙
\sim 430\pm 38\>\rm R_{\odot}
(
∼
2
​
au
\sim 2\>\rm au
).
3.4.2
VX Sgr
For RSGs, the variability is much more irregular and usually consists of several different modes of variability
(Kiss
et al.
2006
)
. VX Sgr is an extreme RSG, perhaps it is even more irregular than other RSGs, exhibiting active and quiescent phases
(Tabernero
et al.
2021
)
. Nonetheless, our results in Fig.
7
clearly show a relation of atmospheric extension with the light curve as well. First, there is an active phase with large brightness and diameter variations, ending around mid-2021 (MJD
∼
59 450
\sim 59\,450
), followed by a quiescent phase. During the time covered by our observations, based on the light curve, we found
P
2017
−
2021
∼
748
​
d
P_{2017-2021}\sim 748\>\rm d
for the active phase, which agrees with the reported period of
754
±
56
​
d
754\pm 56\>\rm d
for the full light curve by
Kiss
et al.
(
2006
)
. For the quiescent phase, we found
P
2021
−
2025
∼
316
​
d
P_{2021-2025}\sim 316\>\rm d
. In the following analysis, we therefore analyze pulsation properties during the active and quiescent phases separately. The cycles are highlighted in Fig.
7
.
In the active cycle,
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
and
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}
showed a similar dominant period to the light curve (see Fig.
8b
) and reach maximum diameter at
ϕ
vis
∼
0.57
−
0.61
\phi_{\rm vis}\sim 0.57-0.61
(shift of 4-5 weeks for
θ
cont
→
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
\theta_{\rm cont}\rightarrow\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}
), i.e., roughly anti-correlated with respect to the light curve. Similarly to R Car, the molecular layer
θ
H
2
​
O
\theta_{\rm H_{2}O}
showed a similar phase shift, but it has an irregular behavior and a relatively large amplitude compared to other layers, while
θ
CO
\theta_{\rm CO}
also showed a more irregular behavior. On the other hand, during the quiescent phase, variations of
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
and
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}
showed a much smaller amplitude and did not follow the light curve so closely. Period analysis of their variations revealed period peaks relatively close to the period of the light curve of
∼
316
​
d
\sim 316\>\rm d
, but not statistically significant (see Fig.
8b
). Therefore, it was not possible to determine phase shifts relative to the light curve during the quiescent phase.
The relative atmospheric extension of the RSG VX Sgr is significantly larger compared to that of the Mira variable R Car. For VX Sgr, the extension of the outermost CO layers is typically in the range of
∼
1.5
−
2.0
​
R
⋆
\sim 1.5-2.0\>R_{\star}
, but it reached about
∼
2.2
​
R
⋆
\sim 2.2\>R_{\star}
during some cycles. The maximum extension of molecular layers was reached at the end of the active cycle, as shown by 3 observations in August 2021 (MJD
∼
59 450
\sim 59\,450
). Surprisingly,
θ
H
2
​
O
\theta_{\rm H_{2}O}
reached a similar angular diameter as that of
θ
CO
\theta_{\rm CO}
,
∼
2.2
​
R
⋆
\sim 2.2\>R_{\star}
, which is about twice compared to the value of
θ
H
2
​
O
\theta_{\rm H_{2}O}
in 2018, where it instead showed a very weak extension. Meanwhile, since 2020,
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
and
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}
have contracted compared to their diameters in the active phase, while showing much smaller diameter variations. Based on the distance value from Table
1
, we estimate the physical size of VX Sgr in different cycles. During the active cycle, the mean continuum radius was
R
⋆
=
1556
±
110
​
R
⊙
R_{\star}=1556\pm 110\>\rm R_{\odot}
(
∼
7
​
au
\sim 7\>\rm au
), with pulsation amplitude
Δ
​
R
∼
197
​
R
⊙
\Delta R\sim 197\>\rm R_{\odot}
. During the quiescent phase, the star contracted, showing the mean radius of
R
⋆
=
1456
±
108
​
R
⊙
R_{\star}=1456\pm 108\>\rm R_{\odot}
and a smaller
Δ
​
R
\Delta R
of
∼
60
​
R
⊙
\sim 60\>\rm R_{\odot}
. This demonstrates extreme change to the pulsation properties of the star between the active and quiescent cycles. The mean radius of CO extension was about
2850
±
200
​
R
⊙
2850\pm 200\>\rm R_{\odot}
(
∼
13
​
au
\sim 13\>\rm au
). Moreover, during the extreme expansion,
R
⋆
R_{\star}
reached a maximum of
1798
±
127
​
R
⊙
1798\pm 127\>\rm R_{\odot}
in September 2019, followed by a maximum of H
2
O and CO layers up to about
∼
3200
​
R
⊙
\sim 3200\>\rm R_{\odot}
observed in August 2021. This extreme event is further discussed in Sect.
5
.
Figure 6:
Upper panel:
Variability of R Car based on the visual magnitude from AAVSO data and the angular diameters determined with VLTI-GRAVITY (binned in 2-week intervals). For clarity, we merge CO bands
θ
CO
​
(
2
−
0
)
\theta_{\rm CO(2-0)}
with
θ
CO
​
(
3
−
1
)
\theta_{\rm CO(3-1)}
and
θ
CO
​
(
4
−
2
)
\theta_{\rm CO(4-2)}
with
θ
CO
​
(
5
−
3
)
\theta_{\rm CO(5-3)}
. Different colors correspond to the continuum and to regions of the extended atmosphere.
Lower panel:
Phase diagram of brightness and diameter variability. Solid lines represent the sine fits for
P
=
307.4
​
d
P=307.4\rm\>d
(same colors as atmospheric layers). Phases
ϕ
vis
\phi_{\rm vis}
for which the fits to angular diameters reach maximum are denoted in the caption.
Figure 7:
Same as Fig.
6
, but for VX Sgr.
Upper panel:
The active and quiescent cycles are highlighted.
Lower panel:
Phase diagram for VX Sgr during the active cycle. Solid lines represent the sine fits. In the phase diagrams, we do not use the extreme values of diameter from August 2021. During the quiescent cycle, it was not possible to determine phase shift to the light curve.
(a)
(b)
Figure 8:
Lomb-Scargle (LS) normalized periodograms that we calculated for R Car (upper panels) and VX Sgr (lower panels). In the panels with diameters, we also highlight the False Alarm Probability
(FAP, VanderPlas
2018
)
, for levels of
1
%
1\%
and
10
%
10\%
(gray and black dashed lines) determined with
astropy
, which is one of the standard ways to judge peak significance. From our layers, usually only
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
and
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}
reach the
1
%
1\%
threshold and show peaks similar to the AAVSO light curve. For VX Sgr, the LS periodogram is shown for the full dataset and the quiescent cycle.
4
Comparison to the CO5BOLD simulation
4.1
Extracting interferometric observables
We compared our observations to the CO5BOLD simulations
(Freytag
et al.
2012
)
, which, along with Athena++
(Stone
et al.
2020
; Goldberg
et al.
2022
)
, are one of the few 3D RHD models of AGB and RSG stars available in the community
(Chiavassa
et al.
2024
)
. A CO5BOLD model is the most suitable for comparison to our results, similar to several previous works, e.g.,
K20
and
Chiavassa
et al.
(
2022
)
. The computation of several pulsation cycles of such 3D models is computationally expensive; thus, the grid is not dense enough to provide a model with exactly the same parameters as R Car (see Table
1
). From the extended grid of 3D models of
low-mass AGB stars used for pulsation studies
(Ahmad
et al.
2025
)
, all relying on the
gray opacity approximation, we selected st28gm05n057 model, which is close to the physical parameters of R Car, except for longer
P
P
. Namely,
M
=
1
​
M
⊙
M=1\>\rm M_{\odot}
,
R
=
291
​
R
⊙
R=291\>\rm R_{\odot}
,
L
=
5024
​
L
⊙
L=5024\>\rm L_{\odot}
,
T
eff
=
2847
​
K
T_{\rm eff}=2847\>\rm K
,
log
⁡
(
g
)
=
−
0.493
​
(
cgs
)
\log(g)=-0.493\>\rm(cgs)
, and
P
=
375.1
​
d
P=375.1\>\rm d
.
This newer model was also chosen as the most suitable because it shows a similar behavior in terms of Mira-like regular pulsations, while the majority of CO5BOLD models show more irregular behavior. The same is the case for the few available RSG models, which generally do not reproduce the interferometric observations so well
(e.g., Arroyo-Torres
et al.
2015
)
and are usually calculated for smaller masses than RSGs have. Therefore, in this work, we focus only on comparison for the selected AGB model, which shows the best agreement with the observed variability.
For the selected model st28gm05n057, we identified a part of the model light curve that resembled the observed photometric variability the most. Then, for the selected snapshots, we calculated the intensity in
K
K
-band (at
R
∼
4000
R\sim 4000
, which is equal to the spectral resolution of VLTI-GRAVITY) in a similar way as described in
Chiavassa
et al.
(
2009
)
, see Fig.
9
. To determine intensity profiles, we constructed rings around the center of the star, at regularly spaced distances in
r
/
R
Ross
r/{R_{\rm Ross}}
, where
R
Ross
{R_{\rm Ross}}
is the Rosseland radius of the star. Then, we calculate
μ
=
cos
⁡
φ
\mu=\cos{\varphi}
, where
φ
\varphi
is the angle between the radial direction and the line of sight, and is related to the radius as
r
/
R
Ross
=
1
−
μ
2
r/R_{\rm Ross}=\sqrt{1-\mu^{2}}
. The observed
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
in the first lobe have been shown to be consistent with a UD fit for both our targets (see Fig.
4
), so we approximate the simulations in the same way. Most importantly, our aim was to study the overall pulsation variations and not the asymmetry of the model. Therefore, following a similar approach as in, e.g.,
Davis
et al.
(
2000
)
and
Wittkowski
et al.
(
2001
)
, we use the Hankel transform. We calculated the interferometric visibility of the model, based on
I
​
(
μ
)
I({\mu})
, angular diameter
θ
\theta
, and spatial frequencies
B
/
λ
B/\lambda
corresponding to our observations, i.e., for baselines from 5 to 35 m.
Then, we apply the same fitting procedure as for the observations in Sect.
3.3
to obtain the angular diameters of continuum, as well as atomic and molecular species. We also determined periods and phase shifts.
Figure 9:
Intensity profiles and intensity maps for snapshots 122 (
t
=
19.18
​
yrs
t=19.18\>\rm yrs
) and 131 (
t
=
20.61
​
yrs
t=20.61\>\rm yrs
) of the AGB model st28gm05n057.
Left panels:
Intensity profiles, plotted for all wavelengths in the GRAVITY spectral range, with 3 representative wavelengths highlighted.
Right panels:
Intensity maps for two selected representative wavelengths are shown,
2.250
​
μ
​
m
2.250\>\rm\mu m
(continuum) and
2.384
​
μ
​
m
2.384\>\rm\mu m
(band head of
12
C
16
O, 5-3). A linear scale is used for the intensity.
Full movies are availble in electronic format [LINK]
Figure 10:
Example of a snapshot of the AGB model that fits well the observations of R Car. The observation of R Car is the same as shown in Fig.
1
, i.e., 2023-01-14, and it is fitted with snapshot 122 for
θ
=
14.87
​
mas
\theta=14.87\>\rm mas
.
Upper panel:
The calibrated flux of R Car and the flux of the AGB model.
Lower panel:
The squared visibility amplitude
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
of R Car, 6 baselines shown in the same color, and compared with the synthetic
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
of the AGB model for the same baselines.
Figure 11:
Same as Fig.
5
, but for the synthetic angular diameters computed from snapshots 119 and 122, i.e., for min and max photospheric radius of our AGB model. Compared to the observations (Fig.
5
), the H
2
O bands show a weaker extension.
4.2
AGB model
For the AGB model st28gm05n057, we extracted 28 snapshots (snapshot numbers from _117 to _145), covering
∼
18
−
23
​
yr
\sim 18-23\>\rm yr
, i.e., 4 pulsation cycles. Example of the calculated observables and their comparison to observations for one of the selected snapshots are shown in Fig.
10
. The comparison shows a close agreement between the computed flux and
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
for the continuum region and the CO bands. The resulting atmospheric extension of the model in the full
K
K
-band is shown in Fig.
11
. The variability of the model st28gm05n057 is shown in Fig.
12
, and the results are listed in Table
4
.
We determined the period of the synthetic bolometric light curve during the cycles covered by our snapshots, and we found
P
=
383.5
​
d
P=383.5\;\rm d
. This allowed us to determine phase shift with respect to the bolometric light curve,
ϕ
bol
\phi_{\rm bol}
. We note that
ϕ
bol
≈
ϕ
vis
\phi_{\rm bol}\approx\phi_{\rm vis}
, as also shown in previous studies
(e.g., Kravchenko
et al.
2019
)
. We then calculated a phase diagram, similar to that for our observations of R Car, and compared the phase shifts
ϕ
bol
\phi_{\rm bol}
. First, we compared the variability of
R
Ross
R_{\rm Ross}
to the bolometric light curve, yielding a maximum diameter at
ϕ
bol
∼
0.22
\phi_{\rm bol}\sim 0.22
, preceding the minimum of the light curve. The variations of synthetic angular diameter also follow the light curve, although, for variations of
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
and
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}
, 
we found even smaller phase shifts, with maximum diameters approximately at
ϕ
bol
∼
0.07
−
0.08
\phi_{\rm bol}\sim 0.07-0.08
, The phase shift between the photosphere and atomic layers (
θ
cont
→
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
\theta_{\rm cont}\rightarrow\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}
) is smaller than for R Car, i.e., only
Δ
​
ϕ
bol
∼
0.01
\Delta\phi_{\rm bol}\sim 0.01
. Nonetheless, we note that during the last two pulsation cycles,
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
shows a better agreement with variations of
R
Ross
R_{\rm Ross}
, shifting the maximum of
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
to
ϕ
bol
∼
0.12
\phi_{\rm bol}\sim 0.12
. The outer layers of H
2
O and CO exhibit a regular behavior, allowing us to determine phase shifts. Molecular bands of H
2
O are much weaker compared to our observations, while
θ
H
2
​
O
\theta_{\rm H_{2}O}
appear to show similar variations as
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
and
θ
Ti
​
i
,
Sc
​
i
\theta_{\rm{Ti\textsc{i}},{Sc\textsc{i}}}
, with a a maximum at
ϕ
bol
∼
0.2
\phi_{\rm bol}\sim 0.2
. Unlike for the observations, molecular bands of CO also showed a clear relation to the light curve, with maximum diameters at
ϕ
bol
∼
0.3
\phi_{\rm bol}\sim 0.3
for variations of
θ
CO
\theta_{\rm CO}
.
Overall, for the Mira AGB model st28gm05n057, variations of synthetic angular diameters show a clear relation to the light curve, although the pulsation amplitudes are much smaller than for the observations (see Tables
3
and
4
). The model shows a smaller relative atmospheric extension compared to R Car, especially at H
2
O bands, which show extension only up to
∼
1.1
​
R
⋆
\sim 1.1\>R_{\star}
. The extension of the outermost CO layers of the model with respect to the photosphere is better reproduced, showing mean extension of
∼
1.4
​
R
⋆
\sim 1.4\>R_{\star}
, but it ranges between
∼
1.3
−
1.5
​
R
⋆
\sim 1.3-1.5\>R_{\star}
during pulsation cycles and shows a more regular behavior.
Full intensity maps in Fig.
9
give a more complete picture. The star clearly shows a larger radius at the wavelengths corresponding to CO band heads (as also shown in Fig.
11
), while during each pulsation cycle, non-spherical outflows occur.
Table 4:
List of results related to the angular diameters of the AGB model and phase shifts (with respect to
ϕ
bol
\phi_{\rm bol}
), determined in the same way as for the observations.
Region
Mean angular diameter
θ
\theta
[mas]
Phase shift
Δ
​
ϕ
bol
\Delta\phi_{\rm bol}
Amplitude
Δ
​
θ
\Delta\theta
[mas]
Rosseland radius
-
0.22
±0.02
-
Continuum
14.81
±0.06
0.07
±0.05
0.24
T
​
i
​
i
{Ti\textsc{i}}
and
S
​
c
​
i
{Sc\textsc{i}}
15.76
±0.06
0.08
±0.04
0.38
H
2
O
16.29
±0.10
0.20
±0.04
0.53
12
C
16
O (2-0)
20.35
±0.09
0.27
±0.02
0.95
12
C
16
O (3-1)
20.53
±0.16
0.30
±0.03
1.14
12
C
16
O (4-2)
19.99
±0.10
0.22
±0.03
0.74
12
C
16
O (5-3)
20.56
±0.12
0.32
±0.04
0.68
Figure 12:
Upper panel:
The selected part of the synthetic bolometric light curve (black line, smoothed), including the computed angular diameters for 28 snapshots of our AGB model. The base value of the angular diameter was set to be similar to that of R Car. Rosseland radius was converted to angular diameter using the distance of R Car (vertically shifted by -2 mas).
Lower panel:
Phase diagram, showing the phase shifts between the synthetic light curve (black dots) and the angular diameters for different atmospheric layers.
5
Discussion
5.1
Comparison to other works
Our results are compatible with other works on the atmospheric extension of AGBs and RSGs, with reported maximum CO extensions up to
∼
1.5
−
2
​
R
⋆
\sim 1.5-2\>R_{\star}
in near-IR, obtained with AMBER/GRAVITY, e.g.,
(Arroyo-Torres
et al.
2015
; Wittkowski
et al.
2018
)
. Meanwhile, in mid-IR bands covered by MATISSE, there are more extended layers of H
2
O, CO, and SiO, up to
∼
10
​
R
⋆
\sim 10\>R_{\star}
(e.g., Chiavassa
et al.
2022
; González-Torà
et al.
2024
)
. As recently shown by
González-Torà
et al.
(
2023
,
2024
)
using GRAVITY/MATISSE data, for a star of given stellar parameters, higher mass-loss rates are correlated with larger atmospheric contribution from molecular bands, altering the density profile in outer layers.
Regarding the variability and phase shifts, for the Mira R Peg in Paper I, it was found that
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
showed a maximum at
ϕ
vis
∼
0.57
\phi_{\rm vis}\sim 0.57
, while more extended layers showed longer phase shifts with respect to the light curve. Meanwhile, using a longer time coverage in this paper, for the Mira R Car, we found
ϕ
vis
∼
0.43
\phi_{\rm vis}\sim 0.43
for the maximum of
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
. We note that both these results are consistent with published high-cadence observations over several pulsation cycles for the Mira S Lac using PTI
(Baylis-Aguirre
et al.
2024
)
, where diameter variations revealed roughly a plateau for the maximum
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
between
ϕ
vis
∼
0.3
−
0.6
\phi_{\rm vis}\sim 0.3-0.6
, while they also reported a regular behavior for the spectral regions dominated by
H
2
​
O
\rm H_{2}O
and
CO
\rm CO
. However, the spectral resolution of PTI is much lower than that of GRAVITY, with only 5 spectral channels in
K
K
-band, i.e., a width of
∼
0.08
​
μ
​
m
\sim 0.08\>\rm\mu m
per channel. Therefore, their results for the
CO
\rm CO
layer are not fully comparable, as in our work, we measured specific band heads of
CO
\rm CO
. We also note that a sine fit may not be a precise representation of the pulsations of radius and light curve; thus, the determined phase shifts are approximations. In any case, for R Car, the regular variations of the photospheric diameter do not show large deviations from the fit. For RSGs, there are no models that can fully reproduce the pulsation curves. However, recently, first attempts have been made to model radial envelope pulsations of pre-SN RSGs
(Suzuki and Shigeyama
2025
; Bronner
et al.
2025
; Laplace
et al.
2026
; Farag
et al.
2026
)
.
Additionally, we compared our observations to synthetic
K
K
-band data calculated for our AGB CO5BOLD model st28gm05n057 (see Sect.
4
). For the photospheric radius (defined as Rosseland radius of the model), we found a maximum at
ϕ
bol
∼
0.22
\phi_{\rm bol}\sim 0.22
, and at even earlier
ϕ
bol
\phi_{\rm bol}
when using interferometric observables. We found a similar value for the AGB model st29gm06n001, used in
K20
, which showed
ϕ
bol
∼
0.2
−
0.3
\phi_{\rm bol}\sim 0.2-0.3
, while the RSG model st35gm04n38, used in
Kravchenko
et al.
(
2019
)
, showed
ϕ
bol
∼
0.3
−
0.4
\phi_{\rm bol}\sim 0.3-0.4
. Additionally, in previous works using the CODEX models
(e.g., Ireland
et al.
2011a
)
, maximum photospheric diameter was also usually reached for
ϕ
bol
\phi_{\rm bol}
between 0.3-0.4. Therefore, all these previous modelling works suggest a maximum photospheric radius preceding the minimum brightness.
In our AGB model, the outer layers of H
2
O and CO exhibit a more regular behavior than the observations of R Car and VX Sgr (see Sect.
3.4
).
The new generation of CO5BOLD models also show a similar irregular behavior of more extended layers up to
∼
2
​
R
⋆
\sim 2\>R_{\star}
(velocity or density plots vs radius and time), i.e., for AGB models in
Freytag and Höfner (
2023
)
and for RSG models in
Freytag
et al.
(
2024
)
.
We also investigated the atmospheric extension of molecular species in our AGB model. We found a good agreement with the CO bands, as the AGB model showed comparable extension to observations in all snapshots. However, there is a significant discrepancy in the H
2
O bands, both in the flux and the visibility. The contribution from H
2
O bands appears much weaker in the models compared to our observations, especially when comparing Figs.
5
and
11
. The slope of the spectrum and visibility below
∼
2.1
​
μ
​
m
\sim 2.1\>\rm\mu m
and above
∼
2.3
​
μ
​
m
\sim 2.3\>\rm\mu m
, where the weaker bands of H
2
O should contribute, does not correspond to the observations. This difference could be due to the gray Rosseland opacity approximation in the CO5BOLD model, which may result in a higher temperature in the upper atmosphere and thus prevent formation of some molecular species and dust
(Höfner and Freytag
2019
)
. Indeed,
Freytag and Höfner (
2023
)
published a few models with an extended computational box and with wavelength-dependent opacity to properly reproduce molecular formation and dust-driven wind. Such models would be best suited for future comparison to observations, once the model grid becomes more compatible with the actual observable stars. The model grid we used in this work was constructed for pulsation studies and shows reasonable agreement with observed pulsation periods and mode properties
(Ahmad
et al.
2023
,
2025
)
.
5.2
Great Dimming of VX Sgr?
Red supergiant VX Sgr exhibits different pulsation properties during its active and quiescent cycles (see Sect.
3.4
). The determined diameters showed an extreme expansion of
θ
H
2
​
O
\theta_{\rm H_{2}O}
and
θ
CO
\theta_{\rm CO}
at the end of the active cycle in mid-2021 , the largest such expansion in our data.
This shows some similarity to the Great Dimming event of Betelgeuse
(Dupree
et al.
2022
; MacLeod
et al.
2023
)
, where a similar behavior was observed for the photospheric layers using the tomographic method
(Kravchenko
et al.
2021
; Jadlovský
et al.
2024
)
, while following the event, the mode of pulsations changed from the fundamental mode to the first overtone.
To further understand this event, we analyzed the optical spectra from the STELLA telescope. The radial velocity was determined using the cross-correlation function (CCF), in a similar way as described in
Jadlovský
et al.
(
2024
)
. The radial velocity and full width at half maximum (FWHM) of CCF (approximately, this is the average width of spectral lines in the optical spectra) are both compatible with the scenario of a mass-loss event induced by a shock (see Fig.
13
). Similar to the case of Betelgeuse
(Kravchenko
et al.
2021
; Jadlovský
et al.
2024
)
, two extreme shocks (as indicated by an increase in FWHM of
∼
30
​
kms
−
1
\sim 30\;\rm kms^{-1}
) preceded the major outflow event. Surprisingly, within the time window from mid-2020 to mid-2021, a very strong Balmer emission emerged (see Fig.
13
). Simultaneously, we also discovered that in the March 2020 observations, hydrogen Br
γ
\gamma
uniquely appeared and temporarily became very prominent in the spectro-interferometric data, namely in the differential phase but not in
|
V
|
2
|V|^{2}
or closure phase.
This Br
γ
\gamma
hydrogen line is usually a signature of accretion, such as in young accreting objects
(e.g., Gravity Collaboration
et al.
2023
; GRAVITY Collaboration
et al.
2024
)
, and it is also used to study massive interacting binaries
(e.g., Klement
et al.
2025
)
. It has not been detected for single RSGs. Only recently, it has been detected for VV Cephei type RSG binary KQ Pup by
Jadlovský
et al.
(
2025
)
, being the first such detection for a RSG with VLTI-GRAVITY. It was also detected in the spectrum of the extreme RSG WOH G64
(Muñoz-Sanchez
et al.
2026
)
, which is likely also a binary. In these systems, Br
γ
\gamma
traces the accreting hot companions and/or their circumstellar disk. However, upon further analysis of the behavior of this mysterious emission during 2020-2021, it appears that in the VX Sgr system, this may not be the same scenario. The radial velocity of the emission peak appears to follow the same curve as the radial velocity of VX Sgr (see Fig.
13
), which suggests this event originates in the atmosphere of VX Sgr and does not trace a binary motion. We note that
Tabernero
et al.
(
2021
)
also reported on occasional Balmer emission, such as in 2018, but our data show much stronger Balmer emissions, while Br
γ
\gamma
is not present in the VLTI data from 2018.
As already shown for R Car (Fig.
3
), hydrogen emission lines can appear as part of their pulsation cycle, due to the passing of a strong shock
(e.g., Fox
et al.
1984
; Fabas
et al.
2011
)
. This scenario seems much more likely, as we have also detected signatures of strong shocks in the optical spectra. Thus, we conclude that indeed, the 2020-2021 event was likely caused by an extreme mass loss event and not by a companion. We note that even though VX Sgr was hypothesized to be a super-AGB star
(Tabernero
et al.
2021
)
, it is very unlikely, as based on its high luminosity, it should rather be an extreme RSG within the mass range of
20
−
40
​
M
⊙
20-40\>\rm M_{\odot}
(Arroyo-Torres
et al.
2013
,
2015
)
. Indeed, we compared the published RSG pulsation models
(Joyce
et al.
2020
)
to our determined radius of VX Sgr (
R
⋆
,
active
=
1556
±
110
​
R
⊙
R_{\star,\rm active}=1556\pm 110\>\rm R_{\odot}
and
R
⋆
,
quiescent
=
1456
±
108
​
R
⊙
R_{\star,\rm quiescent}=1456\pm 108\>\rm R_{\odot}
), as well as to the ratio of likely fundamental mode (FM,
∼
748
​
d
\sim 748\>\rm d
) and first overtone (O1,
∼
316
​
d
\sim 316\>\rm d
) of
O1
/
FM
∼
0.42
\rm O1/FM\sim 0.42
. It is clear that only the most massive RSG models would reproduce such properties.
Figure 13:
Upper panel:
Radial velocity measurements and FWHM of CCF for VX Sgr from the STELLA telescope compared to
V
V
and visual light curves from AAVSO. The data show similar behavior to that of Betelgeuse
(Kravchenko
et al.
2021
; Jadlovský
et al.
2024
)
, namely the double-shock feature in the FWHM plot before the likely mass-loss event.
Lower panel:
H
α
\alpha
for selected STELLA spectra, showing the emergence of the emission component during the 2020-2021 event.
Figure 14:
Schematic overview of our results for R Car and VX Sgr, showing average atmospheric extension and diameter variations (arrows), scaled by the continuum (photopsheric) radius
θ
cont
\theta_{\rm cont}
. For VX Sgr, the properties based on the active cycle are shown.
6
Conclusions
In this work, we have analyzed the largest sample of time-series VLTI-GRAVITY observations up to date for two cool evolved stars, a Mira-type AGB star, R Car, and a RSG, VX Sgr. A schematic overview of our results is shown in Fig.
14
. We studied the variability of the photosphere and atmospheric extension spanning several pulsation cycles and analyzed its relation to brightness variability. We estimated the angular diameters using a uniform disk model. Our results demonstrated that the photosphere and inner atmospheric extension of AGB and RSG stars follow the brightness variability with a phase shift, showing maximum diameters between
ϕ
vis
∼
0.4
−
0.6
\phi_{\rm vis}\sim 0.4-0.6
, i.e., are roughly anti-correlated to the visual light curve. At outer layers (up to
∼
2
​
R
⋆
\sim 2\>R_{\star}
), the variability becomes increasingly irregular, and the timescales are longer. Such behavior is compatible with the results published based on AGB RHD 3D simulations with CO5BOLD
(e.g., Freytag and Höfner
2023
; Freytag
et al.
2024
)
and was also predicted by earlier 1D CODEX models based on self-excited pulsation models
(Ireland
et al.
2008
,
2011b
)
.
For the Mira-type AGB star R Car with regular variability, we found that our determined angular diameters of photospheric and near-photospheric layers are phase-shifted to the brightness variability during each pulsation cycle. Maximum diameters are reached the earliest for the photosphere, at
∼
0.43
\sim 0.43
(continuum), followed by
T
​
i
​
i
{Ti\textsc{i}}
and
S
​
c
​
i
{Sc\textsc{i}}
at
∼
0.46
\sim 0.46
and H
2
O at
∼
0.55
\sim 0.55
, corresponding to about 2-3 weeks delay between the neighboring layers. The overall atmospheric extension reaches about
∼
1.3
−
1.7
​
R
⋆
\sim 1.3-1.7\>R_{\star}
at the CO layers. R Car also shows Br
γ
\gamma
emission in the flux near brightness maxima. For RSG VX Sgr, there is a similar behavior. However, due to its irregular nature, this RSG exhibits extreme change to its pulsation properties during the active and quiescent cycles, with large-amplitude FM pulsations in the former and low-amplitude O1 pulsations in the latter. In the active cycle, the near-photospheric layers behave similarly to those in R Car and show maximum diameters between
ϕ
vis
∼
0.57
−
0.61
\phi_{\rm vis}\sim 0.57-0.61
. However, here the phase shifts translate to a larger time delay of about 4-5 weeks. H
2
O bands show similar variations to the light curve as well, but with a large amplitude. The mean extension of CO reaches up to
∼
1.5
−
2.0
​
R
⋆
\sim 1.5-2.0\>R_{\star}
.
Overall, R Car showed mean photospheric diameter of
θ
cont
=
14.33
±
0.11
​
mas
\theta_{\rm cont}=14.33{\pm 0.11}\rm\>mas
, translating to estimated physical size of photosphere of
R
⋆
=
280
±
25
​
R
⊙
R_{\star}=280\pm 25\>\rm R_{\odot}
, with the FM pulsation amplitude of
Δ
​
R
∼
35
​
R
⊙
\Delta R\sim 35\>\rm R_{\odot}
(
∼
13
%
\sim 13\%
of
R
⋆
R_{\star}
). On the other hand, VX Sgr during the active cycle showed
θ
cont
,
active
=
9.29
±
0.10
​
mas
\theta_{\rm cont,active}=9.29{\pm 0.10}\rm\>mas
, translating to
R
⋆
,
active
=
1556
±
110
​
R
⊙
R_{\star,\rm active}=1556\pm 110\>\rm R_{\odot}
, with pulsation amplitude of
Δ
​
R
∼
197
​
R
⊙
\Delta R\sim 197\>\rm R_{\odot}
(
∼
13
%
\sim 13\%
of
R
⋆
R_{\star}
), corresponding to pulsations in the FM. Meanwhile, during the quiescent cycle, it showed
θ
cont
,
quiescent
=
8.69
±
0.09
​
mas
\theta_{\rm cont,\rm quiescent}=8.69{\pm 0.09}\rm\>mas
, yielding a smaller diameter
R
⋆
,
quiescent
=
1456
±
108
​
R
⊙
R_{\star,\rm quiescent}=1456\pm 108\>\rm R_{\odot}
with a much smaller pulsation amplitude of
Δ
​
R
∼
60
​
R
⊙
\Delta R\sim 60\>\rm R_{\odot}
(
∼
4
%
\sim 4\%
of
R
⋆
R_{\star}
), likely corresponding to the O1.
Furthermore, at the end of its active cycle during 2020-2021, RSG VX Sgr likely showed an extreme mass-loss event preceded by two strong shocks. Following the event, the mode of pulsations changed from
∼
748
​
d
\sim 748\>\rm d
to
∼
316
​
d
\sim 316\>\rm d
. This is a similar behavior to Betelgeuse
(Kravchenko
et al.
2021
; Dupree
et al.
2022
; Jadlovský
et al.
2024
)
, which also showed two shocks preceding the Great Dimming. At the end of the active cycle in mid-2021, the molecular layers of H
2
O and CO showed an extreme expansion, both reaching up to about
∼
2.2
​
R
⋆
\sim 2.2\>R_{\star}
. Uniquely, during this event, VX Sgr showed strong Balmer emission, while Br
γ
\gamma
was also detected in the interferometric data. The hydrogen emission is a signature of an episode of a strong shock passing through the photosphere.
While both R Car and VX Sgr show extended atmospheres, which can appear observationally similar at single epochs, their time variability is quite different. R Car shows a regular variability of the angular radii of the photosphere, near-photospheric atomic and molecular layers, and more extended water vapor layers over several pulsation cycles. VX Sgr shows a more irregular variability of the angular radii of these layers over a similar time span, with an extreme event of levitation of these layers, and a change in pulsation period. This supports the episodic occurrence of extreme shock and levitation events as a main driver for the mass-loss process from RSGs, as suggested by
Dupree
et al.
(
2022
); Humphreys and Jones (
2022
)
, instead of or in addition to the regular pulsation observed in AGB stars. Furthermore, based on the luminosity of VX Sgr and its refined maser distance by
Xu
et al.
(
2018
)
, we compared our results to pulsation models
(e.g., Joyce
et al.
2020
)
. We conclude that VX Sgr is very likely an extremely massive RSG, as opposed to a super-AGB star as proposed in previous studies
(e.g., Tabernero
et al.
2021
)
.
We also compared our time series of R Car to CO5BOLD simulations of AGB stars
(Freytag
et al.
2012
)
, namely AGB model st28gm05n057
(Ahmad
et al.
2025
)
. We calculated the
K
K
-band intensity during several pulsation cycles. We found a qualitative agreement for the variability of the atmospheric extension, with the continuum,
T
​
i
​
i
{Ti\textsc{i}}
and
S
​
c
​
i
{Sc\textsc{i}}
showing pulsations related to the light curve, although showing maximum angular diameters significantly preceding the minimum brightness.
The AGB model is less extended than our observed stars, especially at molecular bands of H
2
O, while CO shows a reasonable agreement. Overall, the simulation shows pulsations, as well as several non-spherical outflows, which are different in each pulsation cycle. The discrepancy in molecular bands of H
2
O may be due to the gray Rosseland opacity approximation in the models
(Höfner and Freytag
2019
)
. This shows the necessity to properly take into account wavelength-dependent opacity, as already done by
Freytag and Höfner (
2023
)
, to achieve better agreement with the observations. A radiative pressure on molecular lines could also play a major role
(e.g., Josselin and Plez
2007
)
. Overall, we have demonstrated that new 3D models show a better agreement with the atmospheric extension than in the previous studies
(e.g., Arroyo-Torres
et al.
2015
)
, and that it is possible to reproduce similar pulsation properties over several pulsation cycles. Future studies will compare the atmospheric extension of new AGB and RSG models in CO5BOLD, while other new 3D grids are also being developed, such as AREPO-RSG
(Ma
et al.
2025
)
.
Acknowledgements.
We thank the anonymous referee for useful comments that improved the quality of the paper.We acknowledge R. Dorda and I. Negueruela for sharing STELLA spectra for VX Sgr from 2016 to 2021. Fruitful discussions with L. Molnár are also acknowledged.
DJ acknowledges support from the ESO-MEYS Training Programme of the public and from the ESO Studentship.
DJ and JK were partly supported by grant GA ČR 25-15910S.
SH and BF acknowledge funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant agreement No. 883867, project EXWINGS) and the Swedish Research Council (Vetenskapsradet, grant number 2019-04059).
The computation of the CO5BOLD model was enabled by resources provided by the Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing (SNIC) and the National Academic Infrastructure for Supercomputing in Sweden (NAISS), partially funded by the Swedish Research Council through grant agreements no. 2018-05973 and no. 2022-06725.
Based on observations made with the Very Large Telescope Interferometer (VLTI) at the Paranal Observatory of European Southern Observatory (ESO).
Based on data obtained with the STELLA robotic telescopes in Tenerife, an AIP facility jointly operated by AIP and IAC.
We acknowledge with thanks the variable star observations from the AAVSO International Database contributed by observers worldwide and used in this research.
References
A. Ahmad, B. Freytag, and S. Höfner (2023)
Properties of self-excited pulsations in 3D simulations of AGB stars and red supergiants
.
A&A
669
,
pp. A49
.
External Links:
Document
,
2211.07682
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§5.1
.
A. Ahmad, B. Freytag, and S. Höfner (2025)
Multi-mode pulsations in AGB stars: Insights from 3D RHD CO5BOLD simulations
.
A&A
699
,
pp. A148
.
External Links:
Document
,
2502.11978
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§4.1
,
§5.1
,
§6
.
B. Arroyo-Torres, M. Wittkowski, A. Chiavassa, M. Scholz, B. Freytag, J. M. Marcaide, P. H. Hauschildt, P. R. Wood, and F. J. Abellan (2015)
What causes the large extensions of red supergiant atmospheres?. Comparisons of interferometric observations with 1D hydrostatic, 3D convection, and 1D pulsating model atmospheres
.
A&A
575
,
pp. A50
.
External Links:
Document
,
1501.01560
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
,
§3.1
,
§3.2
,
§4.1
,
§5.1
,
§5.2
,
§6
,
footnote 1
.
B. Arroyo-Torres, M. Wittkowski, J. M. Marcaide, and P. H. Hauschildt (2013)
The atmospheric structure and fundamental parameters of the red supergiants AH Scorpii, UY Scuti, and KW Sagittarii
.
A&A
554
,
pp. A76
.
External Links:
Document
,
1305.6179
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§5.2
.
Astropy Collaboration, A. M. Price-Whelan, P. L. Lim, N. Earl, N. Starkman, L. Bradley, D. L. Shupe, A. A. Patil, L. Corrales, C. E. Brasseur, M. Nöthe, A. Donath, E. Tollerud, B. M. Morris, A. Ginsburg, E. Vaher, B. A. Weaver, J. Tocknell, W. Jamieson, M. H. van Kerkwijk, T. P. Robitaille, B. Merry, M. Bachetti, H. M. Günther, T. L. Aldcroft, J. A. Alvarado-Montes, A. M. Archibald, A. Bódi, S. Bapat, G. Barentsen, J. Bazán, M. Biswas, M. Boquien, D. J. Burke, D. Cara, M. Cara, K. E. Conroy, S. Conseil, M. W. Craig, R. M. Cross, K. L. Cruz, F. D’Eugenio, N. Dencheva, H. A. R. Devillepoix, J. P. Dietrich, A. D. Eigenbrot, T. Erben, L. Ferreira, D. Foreman-Mackey, R. Fox, N. Freij, S. Garg, R. Geda, L. Glattly, Y. Gondhalekar, K. D. Gordon, D. Grant, P. Greenfield, A. M. Groener, S. Guest, S. Gurovich, R. Handberg, A. Hart, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, D. Homeier, G. Hosseinzadeh, T. Jenness, C. K. Jones, P. Joseph, J. B. Kalmbach, E. Karamehmetoglu, M. Kałuszyński, M. S. P. Kelley, N. Kern, W. E. Kerzendorf, E. W. Koch, S. Kulumani, A. Lee, C. Ly, Z. Ma, C. MacBride, J. M. Maljaars, D. Muna, N. A. Murphy, H. Norman, R. O’Steen, K. A. Oman, C. Pacifici, S. Pascual, J. Pascual-Granado, R. R. Patil, G. I. Perren, T. E. Pickering, T. Rastogi, B. R. Roulston, D. F. Ryan, E. S. Rykoff, J. Sabater, P. Sakurikar, J. Salgado, A. Sanghi, N. Saunders, V. Savchenko, L. Schwardt, M. Seifert-Eckert, A. Y. Shih, A. S. Jain, G. Shukla, J. Sick, C. Simpson, S. Singanamalla, L. P. Singer, J. Singhal, M. Sinha, B. M. Sipőcz, L. R. Spitler, D. Stansby, O. Streicher, J. Šumak, J. D. Swinbank, D. S. Taranu, N. Tewary, G. R. Tremblay, M. de Val-Borro, S. J. Van Kooten, Z. Vasović, S. Verma, J. V. de Miranda Cardoso, P. K. G. Williams, T. J. Wilson, B. Winkel, W. M. Wood-Vasey, R. Xue, P. Yoachim, C. Zhang, A. Zonca, and Astropy Project Contributors (2022)
The Astropy Project: Sustaining and Growing a Community-oriented Open-source Project and the Latest Major Release (v5.0) of the Core Package
.
ApJ
935
(
2
),
pp. 167
.
External Links:
Document
,
2206.14220
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.4
.
D. K. Baylis-Aguirre, M. J. Creech-Eakman, and G. T. van Belle (2024)
A “Wonderful” Reference Dataset of Mira Variables
.
Galaxies
12
(
6
),
pp. 72
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§5.1
.
S. Bladh, S. Liljegren, S. Höfner, B. Aringer, and P. Marigo (2019)
An extensive grid of DARWIN models for M-type AGB stars. I. Mass-loss rates and other properties of dust-driven winds
.
A&A
626
,
pp. A100
.
External Links:
Document
,
1904.10943
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Born and E. Wolf (1980)
Principles of Optics Electromagnetic Theory of Propagation, Interference and Diffraction of Light
.
External Links:
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.3
.
L. Bourges, G. Mella, S. Lafrasse, G. Duvert, A. Chelli, J. -B. Le Bouquin, X. Delfosse, and O. Chesneau (2017)
Cited by:
§2.2
,
footnote 6
.
V. A. Bronner, E. Laplace, F. R. N. Schneider, and Ph. Podsiadlowski (2025)
Explosions of pulsating red supergiants: A natural pathway for the diversity of Type II-P/L supernovae
.
A&A
703
,
pp. A61
.
External Links:
Document
,
2508.11077
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.1
.
X. Chen, Z. Shen, and Y. Xu (2007)
Measuring the Distance of VX Sagittarii with SiO Maser Proper Motions
.
Chinese J. Astron. Astrophys.
7
,
pp. 531–538
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§2.3
.
A. Chiavassa, K. Kravchenko, M. Montargès, F. Millour, A. Matter, B. Freytag, M. Wittkowski, V. Hocdé, P. Cruzalèbes, F. Allouche, B. Lopez, S. Lagarde, R. G. Petrov, A. Meilland, S. Robbe-Dubois, K. -H. Hofmann, G. Weigelt, P. Berio, P. Bendjoya, F. Bettonvil, A. Domiciano de Souza, M. Heininger, Th. Henning, J. W. Isbell, W. Jaffe, L. Labadie, M. Lehmitz, K. Meisenheimer, A. Soulain, J. Varga, J. -C. Augereau, R. van Boekel, L. Burtscher, W. C. Danchi, C. Dominik, J. Drevon, V. Gámez Rosas, M. R. Hogerheijde, J. Hron, L. Klarmann, E. Kokoulina, E. Lagadec, J. Leftley, L. Mosoni, N. Nardetto, C. Paladini, E. Pantin, D. Schertl, P. Stee, L. Szabados, R. Waters, S. Wolf, and G. Yoffe (2022)
The extended atmosphere and circumstellar environment of the cool evolved star VX Sagittarii as seen by MATISSE
.
A&A
658
,
pp. A185
.
External Links:
Document
,
2112.10695
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§4.1
,
§5.1
.
A. Chiavassa, S. Lacour, F. Millour, T. Driebe, M. Wittkowski, B. Plez, E. Thiébaut, E. Josselin, B. Freytag, M. Scholz, and X. Haubois (2010)
VLTI/AMBER spectro-interferometric imaging of VX Sagittarii’s inhomogenous outer atmosphere
.
A&A
511
,
pp. A51
.
External Links:
Document
,
0911.4422
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§3.1
,
§3.3
.
A. Chiavassa, B. Plez, E. Josselin, and B. Freytag (2009)
Radiative hydrodynamics simulations of red supergiant stars. I. interpretation of interferometric observations
.
A&A
506
(
3
),
pp. 1351–1365
.
External Links:
Document
,
0907.1860
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§4.1
.
A. Chiavassa, K. Kravchenko, and J. A. Goldberg (2024)
Signatures of convection in the atmospheres of cool evolved stars
.
Living Reviews in Computational Astrophysics
10
(
1
),
pp. 2
.
External Links:
Document
,
2402.00187
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§4.1
.
J. B. Climent, M. Wittkowski, A. Chiavassa, F. Baron, J. M. Marcaide, J. C. Guirado, B. Freytag, S. Höfner, X. Haubois, and J. Woillez (2020)
VLTI-PIONIER imaging of the red supergiant V602 Carinae
.
A&A
635
,
pp. A160
.
External Links:
Document
,
2002.09243
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
B. Davies and B. Plez (2021)
The impact of winds on the spectral appearance of red supergiants
.
MNRAS
508
(
4
),
pp. 5757–5765
.
External Links:
Document
,
2109.05884
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
J. Davis, W. J. Tango, and A. J. Booth (2000)
Limb-darkening corrections for interferometric uniform disc stellar angular diameters
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
318
(
2
),
pp. 387–392
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/318/2/387/18636655/318-2-387.pdf
Cited by:
§4.1
.
E. De Beck, L. Decin, A. de Koter, K. Justtanont, T. Verhoelst, F. Kemper, and K. M. Menten (2010)
Probing the mass-loss history of AGB and red supergiant stars from CO rotational line profiles. II. CO line survey of evolved stars: derivation of mass-loss rate formulae
.
A&A
523
,
pp. A18
.
External Links:
Document
,
1008.1083
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
L. Decin, O. Vermeulen, M. Esseldeurs, F. A. Driessen, C. Landri, D. Dionese, L. Siess, and D. M. Skowron (2025)
Eppur si eclissa: Eccentric low-mass companions and time-in-dust selection to explain long secondary periods
.
A&A
703
,
pp. L23
.
External Links:
Document
,
2510.24281
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
T. E. Dharmawardena, S. Mairs, P. Scicluna, G. Bell, I. McDonald, K. Menten, A. Weiss, and A. Zijlstra (2020)
Betelgeuse Fainter in the Submillimeter Too: An Analysis of JCMT and APEX Monitoring during the Recent Optical Minimum
.
ApJ
897
(
1
),
pp. L9
.
External Links:
Document
,
2006.09409
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
A. K. Dupree, P. I. Cristofari, M. MacLeod, and K. Kravchenko (2026)
Betelgeuse: Detection of the Expanding Wake of the Companion Star
.
ApJ
998
(
1
),
pp. 50
.
External Links:
Document
,
2601.00470
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
A. K. Dupree, K. G. Strassmeier, T. Calderwood, T. Granzer, M. Weber, K. Kravchenko, L. D. Matthews, M. Montargès, J. Tappin, and W. T. Thompson (2022)
The Great Dimming of Betelgeuse: A Surface Mass Ejection and Its Consequences
.
ApJ
936
(
1
),
pp. 18
.
External Links:
Document
,
2208.01676
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§5.2
,
§6
,
§6
.
A. K. Dupree, K. G. Strassmeier, L. D. Matthews, H. Uitenbroek, T. Calderwood, T. Granzer, E. F. Guinan, R. Leike, M. Montargès, A. M. S. Richards, R. Wasatonic, and M. Weber (2020)
Spatially Resolved Ultraviolet Spectroscopy of the Great Dimming of Betelgeuse
.
ApJ
899
(
1
),
pp. 68
.
External Links:
Document
,
2008.04945
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
N. Fabas, A. Lèbre, and D. Gillet (2011)
Shock-induced polarized hydrogen emission lines in the Mira star o Ceti
.
A&A
535
,
pp. A12
.
External Links:
Document
,
1109.6500
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.1
,
§5.2
.
E. Farag, E. P. Bellinger, P. Mocz, S. Kalici, R. Smolec, S. Kanbur, K. Bettwy, and C. Lindsay (2026)
Self-Consistent Nonlinear Classical Cepheid Pulsations During Stellar Evolution with MESA
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2603.15766
.
External Links:
Document
,
2603.15766
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.1
.
D. Foreman-Mackey, D. W. Hogg, D. Lang, and J. Goodman (2013)
emcee: The MCMC Hammer
.
PASP
125
(
925
),
pp. 306
.
External Links:
Document
,
1202.3665
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.3
.
M. W. Fox, P. R. Wood, and M. A. Dopita (1984)
Shock waves in Mira variables. I. Emission-line spectra.
.
ApJ
286
,
pp. 337–349
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.1
,
§5.2
.
C. Fransson, M. Ergon, P. J. Challis, R. A. Chevalier, K. France, R. P. Kirshner, G. H. Marion, D. Milisavljevic, N. Smith, F. Bufano, A. S. Friedman, T. Kangas, J. Larsson, S. Mattila, S. Benetti, R. Chornock, I. Czekala, A. Soderberg, and J. Sollerman (2014)
High-density Circumstellar Interaction in the Luminous Type IIn SN 2010jl: The First 1100 Days
.
ApJ
797
(
2
),
pp. 118
.
External Links:
Document
,
1312.6617
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
B. Freytag, S. Liljegren, and S. Höfner (2017)
Global 3D radiation-hydrodynamics models of AGB stars. Effects of convection and radial pulsations on atmospheric structures
.
A&A
600
,
pp. A137
.
External Links:
Document
,
1702.05433
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
B. Freytag, M. Steffen, H.-G. Ludwig, S. Wedemeyer-Böhm, W. Schaffenberger, and O. Steiner (2012)
Simulations of stellar convection with CO5BOLD
.
Journal of Computational Physics
231
(
3
),
pp. 919–959
.
External Links:
Document
,
1110.6844
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§4.1
,
§6
.
B. Freytag, S. Höfner, B. Aringer, and A. Chiavassa (2024)
Dimming events of evolved stars due to clouds of molecular gas: Scenarios based on 3D radiation-hydrodynamics simulations with CO5BOLD
.
A&A
692
,
pp. A223
.
External Links:
Document
,
2411.17561
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§5.1
,
§6
.
B. Freytag and S. Höfner (2023)
Global 3D radiation-hydrodynamical models of AGB stars with dust-driven winds
.
A&A
669
,
pp. A155
.
External Links:
Document
,
2301.11836
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§5.1
,
§5.1
,
§6
,
§6
.
Gaia Collaboration, A. G. A. Brown, A. Vallenari, T. Prusti, J. H. J. de Bruijne, C. Babusiaux, M. Biermann, O. L. Creevey, D. W. Evans, L. Eyer, A. Hutton, F. Jansen, C. Jordi, S. A. Klioner, U. Lammers, L. Lindegren, X. Luri, F. Mignard, C. Panem, D. Pourbaix, S. Randich, P. Sartoretti, C. Soubiran, N. A. Walton, F. Arenou, C. A. L. Bailer-Jones, U. Bastian, M. Cropper, R. Drimmel, D. Katz, M. G. Lattanzi, F. van Leeuwen, J. Bakker, C. Cacciari, J. Castañeda, F. De Angeli, C. Ducourant, C. Fabricius, M. Fouesneau, Y. Frémat, R. Guerra, A. Guerrier, J. Guiraud, A. Jean-Antoine Piccolo, E. Masana, R. Messineo, N. Mowlavi, C. Nicolas, K. Nienartowicz, F. Pailler, P. Panuzzo, F. Riclet, W. Roux, G. M. Seabroke, R. Sordo, P. Tanga, F. Thévenin, G. Gracia-Abril, J. Portell, D. Teyssier, M. Altmann, R. Andrae, I. Bellas-Velidis, K. Benson, J. Berthier, R. Blomme, E. Brugaletta, P. W. Burgess, G. Busso, B. Carry, A. Cellino, N. Cheek, G. Clementini, Y. Damerdji, M. Davidson, L. Delchambre, A. Dell’Oro, J. Fernández-Hernández, L. Galluccio, P. García-Lario, M. Garcia-Reinaldos, J. González-Núñez, E. Gosset, R. Haigron, J. -L. Halbwachs, N. C. Hambly, D. L. Harrison, D. Hatzidimitriou, U. Heiter, J. Hernández, D. Hestroffer, S. T. Hodgkin, B. Holl, K. Janßen, G. Jevardat de Fombelle, S. Jordan, A. Krone-Martins, A. C. Lanzafame, W. Löffler, A. Lorca, M. Manteiga, O. Marchal, P. M. Marrese, A. Moitinho, A. Mora, K. Muinonen, P. Osborne, E. Pancino, T. Pauwels, J. -M. Petit, A. Recio-Blanco, P. J. Richards, M. Riello, L. Rimoldini, A. C. Robin, T. Roegiers, J. Rybizki, L. M. Sarro, C. Siopis, M. Smith, A. Sozzetti, A. Ulla, E. Utrilla, M. van Leeuwen, W. van Reeven, U. Abbas, A. Abreu Aramburu, S. Accart, C. Aerts, J. J. Aguado, M. Ajaj, G. Altavilla, M. A. Álvarez, J. Álvarez Cid-Fuentes, J. Alves, R. I. Anderson, E. Anglada Varela, T. Antoja, M. Audard, D. Baines, S. G. Baker, L. Balaguer-Núñez, E. Balbinot, Z. Balog, C. Barache, D. Barbato, M. Barros, M. A. Barstow, S. Bartolomé, J. -L. Bassilana, N. Bauchet, A. Baudesson-Stella, U. Becciani, M. Bellazzini, M. Bernet, S. Bertone, L. Bianchi, S. Blanco-Cuaresma, T. Boch, A. Bombrun, D. Bossini, S. Bouquillon, A. Bragaglia, L. Bramante, E. Breedt, A. Bressan, N. Brouillet, B. Bucciarelli, A. Burlacu, D. Busonero, A. G. Butkevich, R. Buzzi, E. Caffau, R. Cancelliere, H. Cánovas, T. Cantat-Gaudin, R. Carballo, T. Carlucci, M. I. Carnerero, J. M. Carrasco, L. Casamiquela, M. Castellani, A. Castro-Ginard, P. Castro Sampol, L. Chaoul, P. Charlot, L. Chemin, A. Chiavassa, M. -R. L. Cioni, G. Comoretto, W. J. Cooper, T. Cornez, S. Cowell, F. Crifo, M. Crosta, C. Crowley, C. Dafonte, A. Dapergolas, M. David, and P. David (2021)
Gaia Early Data Release 3. Summary of the contents and survey properties
.
A&A
649
,
pp. A1
.
External Links:
Document
,
2012.01533
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§2.3
,
footnote 1
.
H. Gail, A. Tamanai, A. Pucci, and R. Dohmen (2020)
Non-stoichiometric amorphous magnesium-iron silicates in circumstellar dust shells. Dust growth in outflows from supergiants
.
A&A
644
,
pp. A139
.
External Links:
Document
,
2011.05903
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
J. A. Goldberg, Y. Jiang, and L. Bildsten (2022)
Numerical Simulations of Convective Three-dimensional Red Supergiant Envelopes
.
ApJ
929
(
2
),
pp. 156
.
External Links:
Document
,
2110.03261
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§4.1
.
J. A. Goldberg, M. Joyce, and L. Molnár (2024)
A Buddy for Betelgeuse: Binarity as the Origin of the Long Secondary Period in
α
\alpha
Orionis
.
ApJ
977
(
1
),
pp. 35
.
External Links:
Document
,
2408.09089
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
G. González-Torà, M. Wittkowski, B. Davies, B. Plez, and K. Kravchenko (2023)
The effect of winds on atmospheric layers of red supergiants. I. Modelling for interferometric observations
.
A&A
669
,
pp. A76
.
External Links:
Document
,
2210.14940
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§5.1
.
G. González-Torà, M. Wittkowski, B. Davies, and B. Plez (2024)
The effect of winds on atmospheric layers of red supergiants II. Modelling VLTI/GRAVITY and MATISSE observations of AH Sco, KW Sgr, V602 Car, CK Car, and V460 Car
.
A&A
683
,
pp. A19
.
External Links:
Document
,
2312.12521
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§3.1
,
§3.2
,
§5.1
.
GRAVITY Collaboration, R. Abuter, M. Accardo, A. Amorim, N. Anugu, G. Ávila, N. Azouaoui, M. Benisty, J. P. Berger, N. Blind, H. Bonnet, P. Bourget, W. Brandner, R. Brast, A. Buron, L. Burtscher, F. Cassaing, F. Chapron, É. Choquet, Y. Clénet, C. Collin, V. Coudé Du Foresto, W. de Wit, P. T. de Zeeuw, C. Deen, F. Delplancke-Ströbele, R. Dembet, F. Derie, J. Dexter, G. Duvert, M. Ebert, A. Eckart, F. Eisenhauer, M. Esselborn, P. Fédou, G. Finger, P. Garcia, C. E. Garcia Dabo, R. Garcia Lopez, E. Gendron, R. Genzel, S. Gillessen, F. Gonte, P. Gordo, M. Grould, U. Grözinger, S. Guieu, P. Haguenauer, O. Hans, X. Haubois, M. Haug, F. Haussmann, Th. Henning, S. Hippler, M. Horrobin, A. Huber, Z. Hubert, N. Hubin, C. A. Hummel, G. Jakob, A. Janssen, L. Jochum, L. Jocou, A. Kaufer, S. Kellner, S. Kendrew, L. Kern, P. Kervella, M. Kiekebusch, R. Klein, Y. Kok, J. Kolb, M. Kulas, S. Lacour, V. Lapeyrère, B. Lazareff, J. -B. Le Bouquin, P. Lèna, R. Lenzen, S. Lévêque, M. Lippa, Y. Magnard, L. Mehrgan, M. Mellein, A. Mérand, J. Moreno-Ventas, T. Moulin, E. Müller, F. Müller, U. Neumann, S. Oberti, T. Ott, L. Pallanca, J. Panduro, L. Pasquini, T. Paumard, I. Percheron, K. Perraut, G. Perrin, A. Pflüger, O. Pfuhl, T. Phan Duc, P. M. Plewa, D. Popovic, S. Rabien, A. Ramírez, J. Ramos, C. Rau, M. Riquelme, R. -R. Rohloff, G. Rousset, J. Sanchez-Bermudez, S. Scheithauer, M. Schöller, N. Schuhler, J. Spyromilio, C. Straubmeier, E. Sturm, M. Suarez, K. R. W. Tristram, N. Ventura, F. Vincent, I. Waisberg, I. Wank, J. Weber, E. Wieprecht, M. Wiest, E. Wiezorrek, M. Wittkowski, J. Woillez, B. Wolff, S. Yazici, D. Ziegler, and G. Zins (2017)
First light for GRAVITY: Phase referencing optical interferometry for the Very Large Telescope Interferometer
.
A&A
602
,
pp. A94
.
External Links:
Document
,
1705.02345
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§2.1
.
GRAVITY Collaboration, R. Garcia Lopez, A. Natta, R. Fedriani, A. Caratti o Garatti, J. Sanchez-Bermudez, K. Perraut, C. Dougados, Y.-I. Bouarour, J. Bouvier, W. Brandner, P. Garcia, M. Koutoulaki, L. Labadie, H. Linz, E. Alécian, M. Benisty, J.-P. Berger, G. Bourdarot, P. Caselli, Y. Clénet, P. T. de Zeeuw, R. Davies, A. Eckart, F. Eisenhauer, N. M. Förster-Schreiber, E. Gendron, S. Gillessen, S. Grant, Th. Henning, P. Kervella, S. Lacour, V. Lapeyrère, J.-B. Le Bouquin, D. Lutz, F. Mang, H. Nowacki, T. Ott, T. Paumard, G. Perrin, J. Shangguan, T. Shimizu, A. Soulain, C. Straubmeier, E. Sturm, L. Tacconi, E. F. van Dishoeck, F. Vincent, and F. Widmann (2024)
The GRAVITY young stellar object survey. XII. The hot gas disk component in Herbig Ae/Be stars
.
A&A
684
,
pp. A43
.
External Links:
Document
,
2401.07921
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.2
.
GRAVITY Collaboration, G. Rodríguez-Coira, T. Paumard, G. Perrin, F. Vincent, R. Abuter, A. Amorim, M. Bauböck, J. P. Berger, H. Bonnet, W. Brandner, Y. Clénet, P. T. de Zeeuw, J. Dexter, A. Drescher, A. Eckart, F. Eisenhauer, N. M. Förster Schreiber, F. Gao, P. Garcia, E. Gendron, R. Genzel, S. Gillessen, M. Habibi, X. Haubois, T. Henning, S. Hippler, M. Horrobin, A. Jimenez-Rosales, L. Jochum, L. Jocou, A. Kaufer, P. Kervella, S. Lacour, V. Lapeyrère, J. B. Le Bouquin, P. Léna, M. Nowak, T. Ott, K. Perraut, O. Pfuhl, J. Sanchez-Bermudez, J. Shangguan, S. Scheithauer, J. Stadler, O. Straub, C. Straubmeier, E. Sturm, L. J. Tacconi, T. Shimizu, S. von Fellenberg, I. Waisberg, F. Widmann, E. Wieprecht, E. Wiezorrek, J. Woillez, S. Yazici, and G. Zins (2021)
MOLsphere and pulsations of the Galactic Center’s red supergiant GCIRS 7 from VLTI/GRAVITY
.
A&A
651
,
pp. A37
.
External Links:
Document
,
2105.09832
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
Gravity Collaboration, J. A. Wojtczak, L. Labadie, K. Perraut, B. Tessore, A. Soulain, V. Ganci, J. Bouvier, C. Dougados, E. Alécian, H. Nowacki, G. Cozzo, W. Brandner, A. Caratti O Garatti, P. Garcia, R. Garcia Lopez, J. Sanchez-Bermudez, A. Amorim, M. Benisty, J.-P. Berger, G. Bourdarot, P. Caselli, Y. Clénet, P. T. de Zeeuw, R. Davies, A. Drescher, G. Duvert, A. Eckart, F. Eisenhauer, F. Eupen, N. M. Förster-Schreiber, E. Gendron, S. Gillessen, S. Grant, R. Grellmann, G. Heißel, Th. Henning, S. Hippler, M. Horrobin, Z. Hubert, L. Jocou, P. Kervella, S. Lacour, V. Lapeyrère, J.-B. Le Bouquin, P. Léna, D. Lutz, F. Mang, T. Ott, T. Paumard, G. Perrin, S. Scheithauer, J. Shangguan, T. Shimizu, S. Spezzano, O. Straub, C. Straubmeier, E. Sturm, E. van Dishoeck, F. Vincent, and F. Widmann (2023)
The GRAVITY young stellar object survey. IX. Spatially resolved kinematics of hot hydrogen gas in the star-disk interaction region of T Tauri stars
.
A&A
669
,
pp. A59
.
External Links:
Document
,
2210.13095
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.2
.
M. A. T. Groenewegen, F. Baas, J. A. D. L. Blommaert, R. Stehle, E. Josselin, and R. P. J. Tilanus (1999)
Millimeter and some near infra-red observations of short-period Miras and other AGB stars
.
A&AS
140
,
pp. 197–224
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
footnote 1
.
M. G. Guarcello, V. Almendros-Abad, J. B. Lovell, K. Monsch, K. Mužić, J. R. Martínez-Galarza, J. J. Drake, K. Anastasopoulou, M. Andersen, C. Argiroffi, A. Bayo, R. Bonito, D. Capela, F. Damiani, M. Gennaro, A. Ginsburg, E. K. Grebel, J. L. Hora, E. Moraux, F. Najarro, I. Negueruela, L. Prisinzano, N. D. Richardson, B. Ritchie, M. Robberto, T. Rom, E. Sabbi, S. Sciortino, G. Umana, A. Winter, N. J. Wright, and P. Zeidler (2025)
EWOCS-III: JWST observations of the supermassive star cluster Westerlund 1
.
A&A
693
,
pp. A120
.
External Links:
Document
,
2411.13051
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
E. Guinan, R. Wasatonic, T. Calderwood, and D. Carona (2020)
The Fall and Rise in Brightness of Betelgeuse
.
The Astronomer’s Telegram
13512
,
pp. 1
.
External Links:
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
B. Gustafsson, B. Edvardsson, K. Eriksson, U. G. Jørgensen, Å. Nordlund, and B. Plez (2008)
A grid of MARCS model atmospheres for late-type stars. I. Methods and general properties
.
A&A
486
(
3
),
pp. 951–970
.
External Links:
Document
,
0805.0554
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§2.2
,
footnote 6
.
X. Haubois, G. Perrin, S. Lacour, T. Verhoelst, S. Meimon, L. Mugnier, E. Thiébaut, J. P. Berger, S. T. Ridgway, J. D. Monnier, R. Millan-Gabet, and W. Traub (2009)
Imaging the spotty surface of ¡ASTROBJ¿Betelgeuse¡/ASTROBJ¿ in the H band
.
A&A
508
(
2
),
pp. 923–932
.
External Links:
Document
,
0910.4167
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Höfner, S. Bladh, B. Aringer, and K. Eriksson (2022)
Dynamic atmospheres and winds of cool luminous giants. II. Gradual Fe enrichment of wind-driving silicate grains
.
A&A
657
,
pp. A109
.
External Links:
Document
,
2110.15899
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Höfner and B. Freytag (2019)
Exploring the origin of clumpy dust clouds around cool giants. A global 3D RHD model of a dust-forming M-type AGB star
.
A&A
623
,
pp. A158
.
External Links:
Document
,
1902.04074
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§5.1
,
§6
.
S. Höfner and H. Olofsson (2018)
Mass loss of stars on the asymptotic giant branch. Mechanisms, models and measurements
.
A&A Rev.
26
(
1
),
pp. 1
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. B. Howell, D. R. Ciardi, C. A. Clark, D. A. Hope, C. Littlefield, and E. Furlan (2025)
The Probable Direct-imaging Detection of the Stellar Companion to Betelgeuse
.
ApJ
988
(
2
),
pp. L47
.
External Links:
Document
,
2507.15749
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
R. M. Humphreys and T. J. Jones (2022)
Episodic Gaseous Outflows and Mass Loss from Red Supergiants
.
AJ
163
(
3
),
pp. 103
.
External Links:
Document
,
2201.07818
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§6
.
M. J. Ireland, M. Scholz, and P. R. Wood (2008)
Dynamical opacity-sampling models of Mira variables - I. Modelling description and analysis of approximations
.
MNRAS
391
(
4
),
pp. 1994–2002
.
External Links:
Document
,
0810.0560
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§6
.
M. J. Ireland, M. Scholz, and P. R. Wood (2011a)
Dynamical opacity-sampling models of Mira variables - II. Time-dependent atmospheric structure and observable properties of four M-type model series
.
MNRAS
418
(
1
),
pp. 114–128
.
External Links:
Document
,
1107.3619
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.1
.
M. J. Ireland, M. Scholz, and P. R. Wood (2011b)
Dynamical opacity-sampling models of Mira variables - II. Time-dependent atmospheric structure and observable properties of four M-type model series
.
MNRAS
418
(
1
),
pp. 114–128
.
External Links:
Document
,
1107.3619
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§6
.
W. V. Jacobson-Galán, L. Dessart, D. O. Jones, R. Margutti, D. L. Coppejans, G. Dimitriadis, R. J. Foley, C. D. Kilpatrick, D. J. Matthews, S. Rest, G. Terreran, P. D. Aleo, K. Auchettl, P. K. Blanchard, D. A. Coulter, K. W. Davis, T. J. L. de Boer, L. DeMarchi, M. R. Drout, N. Earl, A. Gagliano, C. Gall, J. Hjorth, M. E. Huber, A. L. Ibik, D. Milisavljevic, Y.-C. Pan, A. Rest, R. Ridden-Harper, C. Rojas-Bravo, M. R. Siebert, K. W. Smith, K. Taggart, S. Tinyanont, Q. Wang, and Y. Zenati (2022)
Final Moments. I. Precursor Emission, Envelope Inflation, and Enhanced Mass Loss Preceding the Luminous Type II Supernova 2020tlf
.
ApJ
924
(
1
),
pp. 15
.
External Links:
Document
,
2109.12136
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
D. Jadlovský, L. Molnár, A. Ercolino, M. Bernini-Peron, A. Mérand, J. Krtička, L. Wang, R. Z. Ádám, D. Baade, G. González-Torà, and et al. (2025)
Hidden massive eclipsing binaries in red supergiant systems: The hierarchical triple system KQ Puppis and other candidates
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2509.25168
.
External Links:
2509.25168
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.2
.
D. Jadlovský, T. Granzer, M. Weber, K. Kravchenko, J. Krtička, A. K. Dupree, A. Chiavassa, K. G. Strassmeier, and K. Poppenhäger (2024)
The Great Dimming of Betelgeuse: The photosphere as revealed by tomography over the past 15 yr
.
A&A
685
,
pp. A124
.
External Links:
Document
,
2312.02816
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
Figure 13
,
§5.2
,
§5.2
,
§6
.
A. Jones, S. Noll, W. Kausch, C. Szyszka, and S. Kimeswenger (2013)
An advanced scattered moonlight model for Cerro Paranal
.
A&A
560
,
pp. A91
.
External Links:
Document
,
1310.7030
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§2.2
.
E. Josselin and B. Plez (2007)
Atmospheric dynamics and the mass loss process in red supergiant stars
.
A&A
469
(
2
),
pp. 671–680
.
External Links:
Document
,
0705.0266
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§6
.
M. Joyce, S. Leung, L. Molnár, M. Ireland, C. Kobayashi, and K. Nomoto (2020)
Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: New Mass and Distance Estimates for Betelgeuse through Combined Evolutionary, Asteroseismic, and Hydrodynamic Simulations with MESA
.
ApJ
902
(
1
),
pp. 63
.
External Links:
Document
,
2006.09837
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.2
,
§6
.
L. L. Kiss, Gy. M. Szabó, and T. R. Bedding (2006)
Variability in red supergiant stars: pulsations, long secondary periods and convection noise
.
MNRAS
372
(
4
),
pp. 1721–1734
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0608438
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§3.4.2
,
footnote 1
.
R. Klement, Th. Rivinius, D. Baade, A. Mérand, J. Bodensteiner, A. J. Frost, H. Sana, T. Shenar, D. R. Gies, and P. Hadrava (2025)
VLTI/GRAVITY enables the determination of the first dynamical masses of a classical Be + stripped and bloated pre-subdwarf binary
.
A&A
694
,
pp. A208
.
External Links:
Document
,
2501.04103
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.2
.
J. Kluska, H. Van Winckel, M. Hillen, J. -P. Berger, D. Kamath, J. -B. Le Bouquin, and M. Min (2019)
VLTI/PIONIER survey of disks around post-AGB binaries. Dust sublimation physics rules
.
A&A
631
,
pp. A108
.
External Links:
Document
,
1909.03692
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.3
.
K. Kravchenko, A. Chiavassa, S. Van Eck, A. Jorissen, T. Merle, B. Freytag, and B. Plez (2019)
Tomography of cool giant and supergiant star atmospheres. II. Signature of convection in the atmosphere of the red supergiant star
μ
\mu
Cep
.
A&A
632
,
pp. A28
.
External Links:
Document
,
1910.04657
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§4.2
,
§5.1
.
K. Kravchenko, A. Jorissen, S. Van Eck, T. Merle, A. Chiavassa, C. Paladini, B. Freytag, B. Plez, M. Montargès, and H. Van Winckel (2021)
Atmosphere of Betelgeuse before and during the Great Dimming event revealed by tomography
.
A&A
650
,
pp. L17
.
External Links:
Document
,
2104.08105
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
Figure 13
,
§5.2
,
§5.2
,
§6
.
K. Kravchenko, S. Van Eck, A. Chiavassa, A. Jorissen, B. Freytag, and B. Plez (2018)
Tomography of cool giant and supergiant star atmospheres. I. Validation of the method
.
A&A
610
,
pp. A29
.
External Links:
Document
,
1711.08327
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.4.1
.
K. Kravchenko, M. Wittkowski, A. Jorissen, A. Chiavassa, S. Van Eck, R. I. Anderson, B. Freytag, and U. Käufl (2020)
Tomography of cool giant and supergiant star atmospheres. III. Validation of the method on VLTI/AMBER observations of the Mira star S Ori
.
A&A
642
,
pp. A235
.
External Links:
Document
,
2009.03955
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.2.1
,
§3.2.2
,
§3.2.3
,
§3.2.4
,
§3.2
,
Table 2
,
§4.1
,
§5.1
,
footnote 5
.
A. Lançon, P. H. Hauschildt, D. Ladjal, and M. Mouhcine (2007)
Near-IR spectra of red supergiants and giants. I. Models with solar and with mixing-induced surface abundance ratios
.
A&A
468
(
1
),
pp. 205–220
.
External Links:
Document
,
0704.2120
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.1
.
A. Lançon and P. R. Wood (2000)
A library of 0.5 to 2.5 mu m spectra of luminous cool stars
.
A&AS
146
,
pp. 217–249
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.1
.
E. Laplace, V. A. Bronner, F. R. N. Schneider, and P. Podsiadlowski (2026)
Pulsations Change the Structures of Massive Stars before Explosion: Interpreting SN 2023ixf and SN 2024ggi
.
ApJ
998
(
2
),
pp. L40
.
External Links:
Document
,
2508.11088
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.1
.
P. R. Lawson (Ed.) (2000)
Principles of Long Baseline Stellar Interferometry
.
External Links:
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.3
.
E. M. Levesque and P. Massey (2020)
Betelgeuse Just Is Not That Cool: Effective Temperature Alone Cannot Explain the Recent Dimming of Betelgeuse
.
ApJ
891
(
2
),
pp. L37
.
External Links:
Document
,
2002.10463
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
E. M. Levesque (2017)
Astrophysics of red supergiants
.
2514-3433
,
IOP Publishing
.
External Links:
ISBN 978-0-7503-1329-2
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
G. W. Lockwood and R. F. Wing (1982)
The light and spectrum variations of VX Sgr, an exctremely cool supergiant.
.
MNRAS
198
,
pp. 385–404
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
footnote 1
.
J. Ma, S. Justham, R. Pakmor, A. Chiavassa, T. Ryu, and S. de Mink (2025)
AREPO-RSG: Aspherical Circumstellar Material and Winds from Pulsating Dusty Red Supergiants in Global 3D Radiation Hydrodynamic Simulations
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2510.14875
.
External Links:
Document
,
2510.14875
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§6
.
M. MacLeod, A. Antoni, C. D. Huang, A. Dupree, and A. Loeb (2023)
Left Ringing: Betelgeuse Illuminates the Connection between Convective Outbursts, Mode Switching, and Mass Ejection in Red Supergiants
.
ApJ
956
(
1
),
pp. 27
.
External Links:
Document
,
2305.09732
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.2
.
M. MacLeod, S. Blunt, R. J. De Rosa, A. K. Dupree, T. Granzer, G. M. Harper, C. D. Huang, E. M. Leiner, A. Loeb, E. L. Nielsen, K. G. Strassmeier, J. J. Wang, and M. Weber (2025)
Radial Velocity and Astrometric Evidence for a Close Companion to Betelgeuse
.
ApJ
978
(
1
),
pp. 50
.
External Links:
Document
,
2409.11332
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
N. Mauron and E. Josselin (2011)
The mass-loss rates of red supergiants and the de Jager prescription
.
A&A
526
,
pp. A156
.
External Links:
Document
,
1010.5369
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
footnote 1
.
I. McDonald, A. A. Zijlstra, and M. L. Boyer (2012)
Fundamental parameters and infrared excesses of Hipparcos stars
.
MNRAS
427
(
1
),
pp. 343–357
.
External Links:
Document
,
1208.2037
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.4.1
,
footnote 1
.
B. Mennesson, G. Perrin, G. Chagnon, V. du Coudé Foresto, S. Ridgway, A. Merand, P. Salome, P. Borde, W. Cotton, S. Morel, P. Kervella, W. Traub, and M. Lacasse (2002)
Evidence for Very Extended Gaseous Layers around O-rich Mira Variables and M Giants
.
ApJ
579
(
1
),
pp. 446–454
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Montargès, E. Cannon, E. Lagadec, A. de Koter, P. Kervella, J. Sanchez-Bermudez, C. Paladini, F. Cantalloube, L. Decin, P. Scicluna, K. Kravchenko, A. K. Dupree, S. Ridgway, M. Wittkowski, N. Anugu, R. Norris, G. Rau, G. Perrin, A. Chiavassa, S. Kraus, J. D. Monnier, F. Millour, J. -B. Le Bouquin, X. Haubois, B. Lopez, P. Stee, and W. Danchi (2021)
A dusty veil shading Betelgeuse during its Great Dimming
.
Nature
594
(
7863
),
pp. 365–368
.
External Links:
Document
,
2201.10551
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
G. Muñoz-Sanchez, M. Kalitsounaki, S. de Wit, K. Antoniadis, A. Z. Bonanos, E. Zapartas, K. Boutsia, E. Christodoulou, G. Maravelias, I. Soszynski, and A. Udalski (2026)
The dramatic transition of the extreme red supergiant woh g64 to a yellow hypergiant
.
Nature Astronomy
.
External Links:
ISSN 2397-3366
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
§5.2
.
S. Noll, W. Kausch, M. Barden, A. M. Jones, C. Szyszka, S. Kimeswenger, and J. Vinther (2012)
An atmospheric radiation model for Cerro Paranal. I. The optical spectral range
.
A&A
543
,
pp. A92
.
External Links:
Document
,
1205.2003
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§2.2
.
A. O’Grady, T. J. Moriya, M. Renzo, and A. Vigna-Gómez (2026)
Thorne-Żytkow objects
.
In
Encyclopedia of Astrophysics, Volume 3
,
Vol.
3
,
pp. 336–357
.
External Links:
Document
,
2410.02896
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
K. Ohnaka, J. Bergeat, T. Driebe, U. Graser, K. -H. Hofmann, R. Köhler, Ch. Leinert, B. Lopez, F. Malbet, S. Morel, F. Paresce, G. Perrin, Th. Preibisch, A. Richichi, D. Schertl, M. Schöller, H. Sol, G. Weigelt, and M. Wittkowski (2005)
Mid-infrared interferometry of the Mira variable RR Sco with the VLTI MIDI instrument
.
A&A
429
,
pp. 1057–1067
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
C. Paladini, F. Baron, A. Jorissen, J. -B. Le Bouquin, B. Freytag, S. van Eck, M. Wittkowski, J. Hron, A. Chiavassa, J. -P. Berger, C. Siopis, A. Mayer, G. Sadowski, K. Kravchenko, S. Shetye, F. Kerschbaum, J. Kluska, and S. Ramstedt (2018)
Large granulation cells on the surface of the giant star
π
\pi
1
Gruis
.
Nature
553
(
7688
),
pp. 310–312
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
G. Perrin, S. T. Ridgway, B. Mennesson, W. D. Cotton, J. Woillez, T. Verhoelst, P. Schuller, V. Coudé du Foresto, W. A. Traub, R. Millan-Gabet, and M. G. Lacasse (2004)
Unveiling Mira stars behind the molecules. Confirmation of the molecular layer model with narrow band near-infrared interferometry
.
A&A
426
,
pp. 279–296
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.1
.
G. Perrin, T. Verhoelst, S. T. Ridgway, J. Cami, Q. N. Nguyen, O. Chesneau, B. Lopez, Ch. Leinert, and A. Richichi (2007)
The molecular and dusty composition of Betelgeuse’s inner circumstellar environment
.
A&A
474
(
2
),
pp. 599–608
.
External Links:
Document
,
0709.0356
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.3
.
R. G. Petrov, F. Malbet, G. Weigelt, P. Antonelli, U. Beckmann, Y. Bresson, A. Chelli, M. Dugué, G. Duvert, S. Gennari, L. Glück, P. Kern, S. Lagarde, E. Le Coarer, F. Lisi, F. Millour, K. Perraut, P. Puget, F. Rantakyrö, S. Robbe-Dubois, A. Roussel, P. Salinari, E. Tatulli, G. Zins, M. Accardo, B. Acke, K. Agabi, E. Altariba, B. Arezki, E. Aristidi, C. Baffa, J. Behrend, T. Blöcker, S. Bonhomme, S. Busoni, F. Cassaing, J. -M. Clausse, J. Colin, C. Connot, A. Delboulbé, A. Domiciano de Souza, T. Driebe, P. Feautrier, D. Ferruzzi, T. Forveille, E. Fossat, R. Foy, D. Fraix-Burnet, A. Gallardo, E. Giani, C. Gil, A. Glentzlin, M. Heiden, M. Heininger, O. Hernandez Utrera, K. -H. Hofmann, D. Kamm, M. Kiekebusch, S. Kraus, D. Le Contel, J. -M. Le Contel, T. Lesourd, B. Lopez, M. Lopez, Y. Magnard, A. Marconi, G. Mars, G. Martinot-Lagarde, P. Mathias, P. Mège, J. -L. Monin, D. Mouillet, D. Mourard, E. Nussbaum, K. Ohnaka, J. Pacheco, C. Perrier, Y. Rabbia, S. Rebattu, F. Reynaud, A. Richichi, A. Robini, M. Sacchettini, D. Schertl, M. Schöller, W. Solscheid, A. Spang, P. Stee, P. Stefanini, M. Tallon, I. Tallon-Bosc, D. Tasso, L. Testi, F. Vakili, O. von der Lühe, J. -C. Valtier, M. Vannier, and N. Ventura (2007)
AMBER, the near-infrared spectro-interferometric three-telescope VLTI instrument
.
A&A
464
(
1
),
pp. 1–12
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.2
.
A. Rosales-Guzmán, J. Sanchez-Bermudez, C. Paladini, A. Alberdi, W. Brandner, E. Cannon, G. González-Torá, X. Haubois, Th. Henning, P. Kervella, M. Montarges, G. Perrin, R. Schödel, and M. Wittkowski (2023)
Imaging the innermost gaseous layers of the Mira star R Car with GRAVITY-VLTI
.
A&A
674
,
pp. A62
.
External Links:
Document
,
2303.00056
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§3.3
,
§3.4.1
.
A. Rosales-Guzmán, J. Sanchez-Bermudez, C. Paladini, B. Freytag, M. Wittkowski, A. Alberdi, F. Baron, J. -P. Berger, A. Chiavassa, S. Höfner, A. Jorissen, P. Kervella, J. -B. Le Bouquin, P. Marigo, M. Montargès, M. Trabucchi, S. Tsvetkova, R. Schödel, and S. Van Eck (2024)
A new dimension in the variability of AGB stars: Convection patterns size changes with pulsation
.
A&A
688
,
pp. A124
.
External Links:
Document
,
2405.10164
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
.
N. N. Samus’, E. V. Kazarovets, O. V. Durlevich, N. N. Kireeva, and E. N. Pastukhova (2017)
General catalogue of variable stars: Version GCVS 5.1
.
Astronomy Reports
61
(
1
),
pp. 80–88
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.4.1
,
footnote 1
.
M. Scholz and P. R. Wood (2000)
The derivation of pulsation velocities from Doppler line profiles in M-type Mira variables
.
A&A
362
,
pp. 1065–1071
.
External Links:
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.4.1
.
P. Scicluna, F. Kemper, I. McDonald, S. Srinivasan, A. Trejo, S. H. J. Wallström, J. G. A. Wouterloot, J. Cami, J. Greaves, J. He, D. T. Hoai, H. Kim, O. C. Jones, H. Shinnaga, C. J. R. Clark, T. Dharmawardena, W. Holland, H. Imai, J. T. van Loon, K. M. Menten, R. Wesson, H. Chawner, S. Feng, S. Goldman, F. C. Liu, H. MacIsaac, J. Tang, S. Zeegers, K. Amada, V. Antoniou, A. Bemis, M. L. Boyer, S. Chapman, X. Chen, S. -H. Cho, L. Cui, F. Dell’Agli, P. Friberg, S. Fukaya, H. Gomez, Y. Gong, M. Hadjara, C. Haswell, N. Hirano, S. Hony, H. Izumiura, M. Jeste, X. Jiang, T. Kaminski, N. Keaveney, J. Kim, K. E. Kraemer, Y. -J. Kuan, E. Lagadec, C. F. Lee, D. Li, S. -Y. Liu, T. Liu, I. de Looze, F. Lykou, C. Maraston, J. P. Marshall, M. Matsuura, C. Min, M. Otsuka, M. Oyadomari, H. Parsons, N. A. Patel, E. Peeters, T. A. Pham, J. Qiu, S. Randall, G. Rau, M. P. Redman, A. M. S. Richards, S. Serjeant, C. Shi, G. C. Sloan, M. W. L. Smith, K. -W. Suh, J. A. Toalá, S. Uttenthaler, P. Ventura, B. Wang, I. Yamamura, T. Yang, Y. Yun, F. Zhang, Y. Zhang, G. Zhao, M. Zhu, and A. A. Zijlstra (2022)
The Nearby Evolved Stars Survey II: Constructing a volume-limited sample and first results from the James Clerk Maxwell Telescope
.
MNRAS
512
(
1
),
pp. 1091–1110
.
External Links:
Document
,
2110.12562
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
footnote 1
.
J. M. Stone, K. Tomida, C. J. White, and K. G. Felker (2020)
The Athena++ Adaptive Mesh Refinement Framework: Design and Magnetohydrodynamic Solvers
.
ApJS
249
(
1
),
pp. 4
.
External Links:
Document
,
2005.06651
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§4.1
.
K. G. Strassmeier, T. Granzer, M. Weber, M. Woche, M. I. Andersen, J. Bartus, S. -M. Bauer, F. Dionies, E. Popow, T. Fechner, G. Hildebrandt, A. Washuettl, A. Ritter, A. Schwope, A. Staude, J. Paschke, P. A. Stolz, M. Serre-Ricart, T. de la Rosa, and R. Arnay (2004)
The STELLA robotic observatory
.
Astronomische Nachrichten
325
(
6
),
pp. 527–532
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§2.3
.
A. Suzuki and T. Shigeyama (2025)
Radial pulsation runaway in massive red supergiants in late evolutionary stage and implications to hydrogen-rich supernovae
.
MNRAS
543
(
4
),
pp. 3929–3951
.
External Links:
Document
,
2509.14928
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.1
.
H. M. Tabernero, R. Dorda, I. Negueruela, and E. Marfil (2021)
The nature of VX Sagitarii. Is it a TŻO, a RSG, or a high-mass AGB star?
.
A&A
646
,
pp. A98
.
External Links:
Document
,
2011.09184
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§3.4.2
,
§5.2
,
§5.2
,
§6
,
footnote 1
.
M. Takeuti, A. Nakagawa, T. Kurayama, and M. Honma (2013)
A Method to Estimate the Masses of Asymptotic Giant Branch Variable Stars
.
PASJ
65
,
pp. 60
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
footnote 1
.
D. Taniguchi, K. Yamazaki, and S. Uno (2022)
The Great Dimming of Betelgeuse seen by the Himawari-8 meteorological satellite
.
Nature Astronomy
6
,
pp. 930–935
.
External Links:
Document
,
2205.14165
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
R. R. Thompson, M. J. Creech-Eakman, and G. T. van Belle (2002)
Multiepoch Interferometric Study of Mira Variables. I. Narrowband Diameters of RZ Pegasi and S Lacertae
.
ApJ
577
(
1
),
pp. 447–456
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
R. R. Thompson, M. J. Creech-Eakman, and G. T. van Belle (2003)
Results from the PTI’s studies of the spectral angular diameters of Mira variables
.
In
Interferometry for Optical Astronomy II
,
W. A. Traub (Ed.)
,
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series
, Vol.
4838
,
pp. 221–234
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
A. G. G. M. Tielens (2005)
The Physics and Chemistry of the Interstellar Medium
.
External Links:
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
J. Th. van Loon, M. -R. L. Cioni, A. A. Zijlstra, and C. Loup (2005)
An empirical formula for the mass-loss rates of dust-enshrouded red supergiants and oxygen-rich Asymptotic Giant Branch stars
.
A&A
438
(
1
),
pp. 273–289
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0504379
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
J. T. VanderPlas (2018)
Understanding the Lomb-Scargle Periodogram
.
ApJS
236
(
1
),
pp. 16
.
External Links:
Document
,
1703.09824
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
Figure 8
.
W. Vlemmings, T. Khouri, B. Bojnordi Arbab, E. De Beck, and M. Maercker (2024)
One month convection timescale on the surface of a giant evolved star
.
Nature
633
(
8029
),
pp. 323–326
.
External Links:
Document
,
2409.06785
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
N. Vogt, A. Contreras-Quijada, I. Fuentes-Morales, S. Vogt-Geisse, C. Arcos, C. Abarca, C. Agurto-Gangas, M. Caviedes, H. DaSilva, J. Flores, V. Gotta, F. Peñaloza, K. Rojas, and J. I. Villaseñor (2016)
Determination of Pulsation Periods and Other Parameters of 2875 Stars Classified as MIRA in the All Sky Automated Survey (ASAS)
.
ApJS
227
(
1
),
pp. 6
.
External Links:
Document
,
1609.05246
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
footnote 1
.
M. Weber, T. Granzer, K. G. Strassmeier, and M. Woche (2008)
The STELLA robotic observatory: first two years of high-resolution spectroscopy
.
In
Advanced Software and Control for Astronomy II
,
A. Bridger and N. M. Radziwill (Eds.)
,
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series
, Vol.
7019
,
pp. 70190L
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§2.3
.
M. Weber, T. Granzer, and K. G. Strassmeier (2012)
The STELLA robotic observatory on Tenerife
.
In
Software and Cyberinfrastructure for Astronomy II
,
N. M. Radziwill and G. Chiozzi (Eds.)
,
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series
, Vol.
8451
,
pp. 84510K
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§2.3
.
P. A. Whitelock, M. W. Feast, and F. Van Leeuwen (2008)
AGB variables and the Mira period-luminosity relation
.
MNRAS
386
(
1
),
pp. 313–323
.
External Links:
Document
,
0801.4465
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
footnote 1
.
M. Wittkowski, B. Arroyo-Torres, J. M. Marcaide, F. J. Abellan, A. Chiavassa, and J. C. Guirado (2017)
VLTI/AMBER spectro-interferometry of the late-type supergiants V766 Cen (=HR 5171 A),
σ
\sigma
Oph, BM Sco, and HD 206859
.
A&A
597
,
pp. A9
.
External Links:
Document
,
1610.01927
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Wittkowski, A. Chiavassa, B. Freytag, M. Scholz, S. Höfner, I. Karovicova, and P. A. Whitelock (2016)
Near-infrared spectro-interferometry of Mira variables and comparisons to 1D dynamic model atmospheres and 3D convection simulations
.
A&A
587
,
pp. A12
.
External Links:
Document
,
1601.02368
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Wittkowski, C. A. Hummel, K. J. Johnston, D. Mozurkewich, A. R. Hajian, and N. M. White (2001)
Direct multi-wavelength limb-darkening measurements of three late-type giants with the Navy Prototype Optical Interferometer
.
A&A
377
,
pp. 981–993
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0108192
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§4.1
.
M. Wittkowski, G. Rau, A. Chiavassa, S. Höfner, M. Scholz, P. R. Wood, W. J. de Wit, F. Eisenhauer, X. Haubois, and T. Paumard (2018)
VLTI-GRAVITY measurements of cool evolved stars. I. Variable photosphere and extended atmosphere of the Mira star R Peg
.
A&A
613
,
pp. L7
.
External Links:
Document
,
1805.05333
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
,
§3.1
,
§3.2
,
§3.3
,
§5.1
.
P. Woitke (2006)
2D models for dust-driven AGB star winds
.
A&A
452
(
2
),
pp. 537–549
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0602371
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
P. R. Wood, C. Alcock, R. A. Allsman, D. Alves, T. S. Axelrod, A. C. Becker, D. P. Bennett, K. H. Cook, A. J. Drake, K. C. Freeman, K. Griest, L. J. King, M. J. Lehner, S. L. Marshall, D. Minniti, B. A. Peterson, M. R. Pratt, P. J. Quinn, C. W. Stubbs, W. Sutherland, A. Tomaney, T. Vandehei, and D. L. Welch (1999)
MACHO observations of LMC red giants: Mira and semi-regular pulsators, and contact and semi-detached binaries
.
In
Asymptotic Giant Branch Stars
,
T. Le Bertre, A. Lebre, and C. Waelkens (Eds.)
,
IAU Symposium
, Vol.
191
,
pp. 151
.
External Links:
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
.
P. R. Wood and C. P. Nicholls (2009)
Evidence for Mass Ejection Associated with Long Secondary Periods in Red Giants
.
ApJ
707
(
1
),
pp. 573–579
.
External Links:
Document
,
0910.4418
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
P. R. Wood (2000)
Variable Red Giants in the LMC: Pulsating Stars and Binaries?
.
PASA
17
(
1
),
pp. 18–21
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Xu, B. Zhang, M. J. Reid, K. M. Menten, X. Zheng, and G. Wang (2018)
The Parallax of the Red Hypergiant VX Sgr with Accurate Tropospheric Delay Calibration
.
ApJ
859
(
1
),
pp. 14
.
External Links:
Document
,
1804.00894
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§2.3
,
§6
,
footnote 1
.
Appendix A
Observing logs
Table 5:
List of observations VX Sgr taken with VLTI-GRAVITY at the small VLTI-AT configuration.
Date
Time [UT]
Science exposure [s]
Seeing [”]
Coherence time [ms]
Calibrators
Epoch
2018-04-09
07:37:30
10.0
0.39
8.88
24 Sgr, 28 Sgr
1
2019-03-26
08:38:02
10.0
0.89
5.79
24 Sgr, HD 176124
2
2019-03-27
08:53:22
10.0
1.38
2.32
24 Sgr, HD 176124
2
2019-06-01
06:23:50
5.0
1.06
2.21
14 Sgr
3
2019-06-01
08:07:00
5.0
1.31
2.53
14 Sgr
3
2019-06-01
08:56:57
5.0
1.44
3.11
14 Sgr
3
2019-06-04
02:36:50
5.0
0.94
5.58
14 Sgr
3
2019-07-31
00:24:19
5.0
0.97
3.03
14 Sgr
4
2019-07-31
03:45:03
5.0
1.35
2.91
14 Sgr
4
2019-07-31
22:58:04
5.0
0.98
2.62
14 Sgr
4
2019-08-01
02:18:55
5.0
1.32
1.90
14 Sgr
4
2019-08-01
02:35:28
5.0
1.40
1.93
14 Sgr
4
2019-08-02
03:32:50
5.0
1.78
1.56
14 Sgr
4
2019-08-03
23:41:41
5.0
0.63
5.63
14 Sgr
4
2019-09-04
02:35:58
5.0
0.54
3.84
14 Sgr
5
2020-03-20
07:48:18
5.0
0.98
5.44
14 Sgr
6
2020-03-20
08:10:54
5.0
0.84
6.80
14 Sgr
6
2021-08-30
02:24:52
0.3
1.29
1.68
14 Sgr
7
2021-08-31
01:35:48
0.3
0.84
2.84
14 Sgr
7
2021-08-31
23:47:58
3.0
0.76
4.42
24 Sgr, HD 176124
7
2022-04-30
09:02:21
3.0
0.56
6.02
24 Sgr, HD 176124
8
2022-06-24
06:26:41
3.0
0.90
2.10
24 Sgr, HD 176124
9
2022-08-21
03:02:24
3.0
0.79
4.03
24 Sgr, HD 176124
10
2022-08-21
03:14:43
3.0
0.9
3.26
24 Sgr, HD 176124
10
2022-09-23
00:44:09
3.0
1.04
2.86
24 Sgr, HD 176124
11
2022-10-14
00:24:04
3.0
1.04
6.24
24 Sgr, HD 176124
12
2022-10-14
00:45:02
3.0
0.68
5.47
24 Sgr, HD 176124
12
2023-03-27
07:58:35
3.0
0.44
6.48
24 Sgr, HD 176124
13
2023-05-13
04:36:34
3.0
1.20
4.36
24 Sgr, HD 176124
14
2023-06-08
07:01:38
3.0
0.38
11.10
24 Sgr, HD 176124
15
2023-07-12
05:11:47
3.0
1.04
1.92
24 Sgr, HD 176124
16
2023-08-10
03:41:39
3.0
1.27
1.52
24 Sgr, HD 176124
17
2023-09-22
01:41:55
3.0
1.38
2.28
24 Sgr, HD 176124
18
2025-04-05
06:59:49
3.0
0.52
7.61
24 Sgr, HD 152636
19
2025-05-19
09:02:23
3.0
0.65
6.01
24 Sgr, HD 152636
20
2025-06-24
06:02:35
3.0
0.70
2.99
24 Sgr, HD 152636
21
Table 6:
Same as Table
5
, but for R Car.
Date
Time [UT]
Science exposure [s]
Seeing [”]
Coherence time [ms]
Calibrators
Epoch
2018-01-27
05:19:03
3.0
0.70
5.34
ι
\iota
Car
1
2018-01-27
06:15:11
3.0
0.81
5.22
ι
\iota
Car
1
2018-01-27
07:08:47
3.0
0.73
5.92
ι
\iota
Car
1
2018-01-27
08:13:16
3.0
0.50
6.25
ι
\iota
Car
1
2018-02-22
05:29:51
3.0
0.47
12.54
ι
\iota
Car
2
2018-02-25
05:27:26
3.0
0.33
13.34
ι
\iota
Car
2
2018-03-10
05:05:22
3.0
0.45
7.07
ι
\iota
Car
2
2018-03-12
00:44:15
3.0
0.79
4.90
ι
\iota
Car
2
2020-12-27
06:12:44
3.0
1.27
2.61
β
\beta
Vol, t
2
Car
3
2021-02-21
06:15:38
3.0
0.54
9.12
β
\beta
Vol, t
2
Car
4
2021-03-14
03:16:43
3.0
0.64
7.21
β
\beta
Vol, t
2
Car
5
2021-05-20
23:25:02
3.0
0.92
2.67
β
\beta
Vol, t
2
Car
6
2022-02-03
06:58:03
3.0
0.68
8.31
t
2
Car
7
2022-04-28
01:28:19
3.0
0.71
3.24
β
\beta
Vol, t
2
Car
8
2022-11-20
07:15:40
3.0
0.61
4.99
β
\beta
Vol, t
2
Car
9
2023-01-14
05:31:04
3.0
1.17
3.43
β
\beta
Vol, t
2
Car
10
2023-02-25
01:06:22
3.0
0.78
4.02
β
\beta
Vol, t
2
Car
11
2023-05-13
00:20:31
3.0
0.55
8.22
β
\beta
Vol, t
2
Car
12
Table 7:
Properties of the calibrators used for VLTI-GRAVITY observations of R Car and VX Sgr.
6
6
6
Listed are the limb-darkened disk (LDD) and K-band diameters (UDK) from
Bourges
et al.
(
2017
)
. We also list properties of MARCS models
(Gustafsson
et al.
2008
)
used for flux calibration, with
T
eff
T_{\rm eff}
and
log
⁡
g
\log g
estimated from spectral type.
Calibrator
Spectral Type
LDD [mas]
UDK [mas]
T
eff
​
[
K
]
T_{\rm eff}\>\rm[K]
log
⁡
g
\log g
(cgs)
14 Sgr
K2III
2.28
±
\pm
0.23
2.23
3900
1.5
24 Sgr
K3III
3.52
±
\pm
0.36
3.44
4000
0.5
28 Sgr
K5III
2.81
±
\pm
0.25
2.74
3900
1.5
β
\beta
Vol
K2III
2.95
±
\pm
0.30
2.88
4750
3
ι
\iota
Car
A7Ib
1.87
±
\pm
0.19
1.84
8000
2.0
t
2
Car
K4/5(III)
3.67
±
\pm
0.40
3.58
3900
1.5
HD 176124
M3III
4.25
±
\pm
0.44
4.21
3300
2.0
HD 152636
K5III
2.39
±
\pm
0.23
2.33
3800
2.0
Appendix B
Full VLTI dataset of R Car
Figure 15:
Full spectro-interferometric dataset for R Car. Namely flux (calibrated using the spectral transfer function), squared visibility, and closure phase. Data from the fringe tracker are also shown as black crosses.
Figure 16:
Same as Fig.
15
, continued.
Appendix C
Full VLTI dataset of VX Sgr
Figure 17:
Same as Fig.
15
, but for VX Sgr.
Figure 18:
Same as Fig.
17
, continued.
Figure 19:
Same as Fig.
18
, continued.
Figure 20:
Same as Fig.
19
, continued.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA