Nonlinear Probabilistic Forecast Reconciliation
Report GitHub Issue
Г—
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
2
Notation
3
Probabilistic Methods for Nonlinear Reconciliation
3.1
Reconciliation via Projection
3.2
Reconciliation via conditioning
Unscented Transform
3.3
Limitations
4
Experiments
Probabilistic bottom-up
Evaluation metrics
4.1
Synthethic data
Results
Computation times
4.2
Reconciliation of Swiss socio-demographic ratios
Results
4.3
Australian Tourism Ratio
Results
5
Conclusions
A
Reconciliation via UKF computation
Computation of
Пғ
\sigma
-points
Computation of weights
Obtaining the Kalman Gain
Computing the reconciled distribution
B
Derivation of the reconciled distribution via conditioning
C
UKF as reconciliation via conditioning
D
Results
References
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2604.26668v1 [stat.ME] 29 Apr 2026
Nonlinear Probabilistic Forecast Reconciliation
Anubhab Biswas
anubhab.biswas@supsi.ch
Lorenzo Zambon
Lorenzo Nespoli
Giorgio Corani
ISAAC, SUPSI, Institute for Applied Sustainability in the Built Environment, CH-6850, Mendrisio, Switzerland
IDSIA (USI-SUPSI), Dalle Molle Institute for Artifical Intelligence, CH-6892, Lugano, Switzerland
Abstract
Forecast reconciliation adjusts independently generated forecasts so that they satisfy some known constraints. While probabilistic forecast reconciliation is well established for linear constraints, some practical forecasting problems involve nonlinear relationships among variables. In this paper, we address probabilistic forecast reconciliation with nonlinear constraints for the first time. We extend both reconciliation via projection and conditioning to the case of nonlinear constraints. The projection approach reconciles forecast samples by mapping them onto the nonlinear coherent manifold. The conditioning approach adopts a sampling algorithm inspired to the Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF). We evaluate both methods on synthetic and real datasets. Empirically, both reconciliation approaches generally improve forecast accuracy. The UKF-based approach achieves the best overall performance while being substantially faster than the projection one.
keywords:
Forecast, Reconciliation, Probabilistic forecast , Nonlinear constraints
вҖ 
вҖ 
journal:
International Journal of Forecasting
1
Introduction
Time series are often related by linear constraints of aggregation. For example, for a certain store,
consider forecasting both the sales of each item and the total sales.
The forecast of the total sales of the store should be equal to the sum of the forecast of the sales of each item. If forecasts satisfy these constraints they are
coherent
, while if they fail to satisfy the constraints they are
incoherent
.
Base forecasts
, which are created independently for each time series, are generally incoherent.
Forecast reconciliation
adjusts the base forecasts making them coherent.
The first methods for forecast reconciliation were based on projection
(Athanasopoulos
et al.
,
2009
; Hyndman
et al.
,
2011
)
. In particular,
Wickramasuriya
et al.
(
2019
)
obtained in closed form the projection that minimizes the expected squared error of the coherent forecast. Such methods can be interpreted as projecting the base point forecast onto the linear coherent subspace
(Panagiotelis
et al.
,
2021
)
.
While the above methods refer to point forecast reconciliation, the most advanced approaches perform linear probabilistic reconciliation yielding a probability density on the linear coherent subspace.
Earlier studies include
Taieb
et al.
(
2021
)
, where an empirical copula based approach for reconciliation which uses permutation of the samples was studied.
There are two main approaches to probabilistic forecast reconciliation. The first one is the extension of the
reconciliation via projection
method to the probabilistic case
(Panagiotelis
et al.
,
2023
; Wickramasuriya,
2024
)
.
The second approach is
reconciliation via conditioning
where the incoherent density of the base forecast is sliced on the coherent subspace. This approach has been extensively studied for continuous, discrete and mixed-type of linearly constrained time series
(Zambon
et al.
,
2023
,
2024a
,
2024b
)
. Also the probabilistic approaches of
Corani
et al.
(
2021
,
2024
)
have been shown to be equivalent to
reconciliation via conditioning
(Zambon
et al.
,
2024a
)
.
Several applications in multiple time series forecasting include nonlinear constraints between the time series, such as socio-demographic ratios like mortality or unemployment rates
(Girolimetto
et al.
,
2025
)
.
Very recently the projection-based reconciliation approach has been extended to obtain coherent forecasts for time series with nonlinear constraints
(Nespoli
et al.
,
2026
; Girolimetto
et al.
,
2025
)
; however, these works are limited to point forecasts.
We address probabilistic forecast reconciliation under nonlinear constraints for the first time.
We extend both reconciliation via
projection
and via
conditioning
to the case of time series with nonlinear constraints.
The projection-based reconciliation projects each sample point from the cloud of the base forecast distribution to points on the manifold. However, it has the shortcoming of requiring a numerical optimization for each sample to be reconciled, leading to heavy computation times.
yoriichi300As an alternative, we also propose an algorithm based on
reconciliation via conditioning
, with a sampling strategy inspired by the Unscented Kalman Filter
(Julier and Uhlmann,
2004
)
. In our experiments, it provides slightly more accurate results than projection while also substantially reducing computation time.
The paper is organized as follows.
Section 2
introduces the notations and terminology needed for probabilistic nonlinear reconciliation.
Section 3
introduces probabilistic reconciliation under nonlinear constraints and presents the extensions of reconciliation via projection and reconciliation via conditioning.
Section 4
discusses the experimental setup and evaluates the proposed methods on both simulated synthetic data with different nonlinearities and two real case studies involving socio-demographic ratios of Switzerland and tourism ratio of Australia.
Section 5
concludes and highlights the directions for future research along with the limitations of our proposed methods. All the codes related to the experiments can be found in the
public Github repository
1
1
1
https://github.com/ijfpnlr-svg/ijf_sub
and can be reproduced. The reported computation times were obtained on a machine with Intel Core i7-1370P processor (20 CPU cores) and 32 GB of RAM, running in
Linux
.
2
Notation
Z
=
X
Y
Z=\frac{X}{Y}
X
X
Y
Y
Figure 1
:
Example of time series with nonlinear constraints; the free time series are
X
X
and
Y
Y
, the constrained time series
Z
Z
is the ratio of the two.
Let us consider the time series
рқҗҒ
t
=
{
B
t
1
,
вҖҰ
,
B
t
n
b
}
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
b
\mathbf{B}_{t}=\{B^{1}_{t},\dots,B^{n_{b}}_{t}\}\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{b}}
and
рқҗ”
t
=
{
U
t
1
,
вҖҰ
,
U
t
n
u
}
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
u
\mathbf{U}_{t}=\{U^{1}_{t},\dots,U^{n_{u}}_{t}\}\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{u}}
, such that, at each time
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
t=1,\dots,T
:
рқҗ”
t
=
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗҒ
t
)
,
\mathbf{U}_{t}=f_{u}(\mathbf{B}_{t}),
(1)
for some function
f
u
:
в„қ
n
b
вҶ’
в„қ
n
u
f_{u}:\mathbb{R}^{n_{b}}\to\mathbb{R}^{n_{u}}
.
This formulation generalizes the classic framework of hierarchical time series, in which
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗҒ
t
)
=
рқҗҖрқҗҒ
t
f_{u}(\mathbf{B}_{t})=\mathbf{A}\mathbf{B}_{t}
and
рқҗҖ
\mathbf{A}
is the aggregation matrix.
We refer to
рқҗҒ
t
\mathbf{B}_{t}
and
рқҗ”
t
\mathbf{U}_{t}
respectively as
free
and
constrained
time series, and we call
f
u
f_{u}
the free-to-constrained (FTC) function.
We show an example in Fig.
1
, where
f
u
вҖӢ
(
x
,
y
)
=
x
/
y
f_{u}(x,y)=x/y
.
Note that the choice for the set of free time series might be arbitrary; in this case, we could equivalently set
X
t
X_{t}
as the constrained series and
f
u
вҖӢ
(
y
,
z
)
=
y
вӢ…
z
f_{u}(y,z)=y\cdot z
.
We then define the full vector of time series as
рқҗҳ
t
=
[
рқҗ”
t
рқҗҒ
t
]
=
[
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗҒ
t
)
рқҗҒ
t
]
=
f
вҖӢ
(
рқҗҒ
t
)
,
\mathbf{Y}_{t}=\begin{bmatrix}\mathbf{U}_{t}\\
\mathbf{B}_{t}\end{bmatrix}=\begin{bmatrix}f_{u}(\mathbf{B}_{t})\\
\mathbf{B}_{t}\end{bmatrix}=f(\mathbf{B}_{t}),
(2)
where
f
:
в„қ
n
b
вҶ’
в„қ
n
f:\mathbb{R}^{n_{b}}\to\mathbb{R}^{n}
is the free-to-all (FTA) function.
At each time
t
t
, the vector
рқҗҳ
t
\mathbf{Y}_{t}
lies on the nonlinear manifold
в„і
:=
{
f
вҖӢ
(
рқҗӣ
)
:
рқҗӣ
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
b
}
,
\mathcal{M}:=\{f(\mathbf{b}):\mathbf{b}\in\mathbb{R}^{n_{b}}\},
(3)
which generalizes the linear coherent subspace
рқ’®
\mathcal{S}
used in linear reconciliation. We summarize the notation in Table
1
, where we also compare it with its linear counterpart, keeping similar notations wherever possible.
Let
рқҗІ
^
t
+
h
\hat{\mathbf{y}}_{t+h}
denote the base point forecast of
рқҗҳ
t
\mathbf{Y}_{t}
at horizon
h
h
, and
рқҗІ
~
t
+
h
\tilde{\mathbf{y}}_{t+h}
the reconciled (coherent) point forecast. We denote the base point forecasts for the free and constrained components as
рқҗӣ
^
t
+
h
\hat{\mathbf{b}}_{t+h}
and
рқҗ®
^
t
+
h
\hat{\mathbf{u}}_{t+h}
, and their reconciled counterparts as
рқҗӣ
~
t
+
h
\tilde{\mathbf{b}}_{t+h}
and
рқҗ®
~
t
+
h
\tilde{\mathbf{u}}_{t+h}
. In our experiments we focus on
h
=
1
h=1
; and in the following sections we drop the subscript
t
+
h
t+h
for simplicity.
Linear Entity
Notation
Generalization
Notation
Bottom time series
рқҗҒ
t
\mathbf{B}_{t}
Free time series
рқҗҒ
t
\mathbf{B}_{t}
Upper time series
рқҗ”
t
\mathbf{U}_{t}
Constrained time series
рқҗ”
t
\mathbf{U}_{t}
Coherent linear subspace
рқ’®
\mathcal{S}
Coherent manifold
в„і
\mathcal{M}
Aggregation matrix
рқҗҖ
\mathbf{A}
Free-to-constrained (FTC) function
f
u
(
.
)
f_{u}(.)
Summing matrix
рқҗ’
\mathbf{S}
Free-to-all (FTA) function
f
(
.
)
f(.)
No. of bottom series
n
b
n_{b}
No. of free series
n
b
n_{b}
No. of upper series
n
u
n_{u}
No. of constrained series
n
u
n_{u}
No. of series
n
n
No. of series
n
n
Table 1
:
A generalized notation for forecast reconciliation
Figure 2
:
Example of nonlinear probabilistic reconciliation of the ratio constraint described in Fig.
1
- The purple surface denotes the coherent manifold where the incoherent red points are made coherent as green.
Following
Panagiotelis
et al.
(
2023
)
, we denote the forecast distribution of the free time series
B
t
B_{t}
by the probability triple
(
в„қ
n
b
,
в„ұ
в„қ
n
b
,
ОҪ
)
(\mathbb{R}^{n_{b}},\mathcal{F}_{\mathbb{R}^{n_{b}}},\nu)
, where
в„ұ
в„қ
n
b
\mathcal{F}_{\mathbb{R}^{n_{b}}}
denotes the Borel
Пғ
\sigma
-algebra associated with
в„қ
n
b
\mathbb{R}^{n_{b}}
. Below we define
coherence
in terms of probability distributions for time series with nonlinear constraints.
Definition 1
(
Coherent Probability Triple
)
.
A probability triple
(
в„і
,
в„ұ
в„і
,
ОҪ
Лҳ
в„і
)
(\mathcal{M},\mathcal{F}_{\mathcal{M}},\breve{\nu}_{\mathcal{M}})
is coherent with the free-level probability triple
(
в„қ
n
b
,
в„ұ
в„қ
n
b
,
ОҪ
)
(\mathbb{R}^{n_{b}},\mathcal{F}_{\mathbb{R}^{n_{b}}},\nu)
if
ОҪ
Лҳ
в„і
вҖӢ
(
f
вҖӢ
(
в„¬
)
)
=
ОҪ
вҖӢ
(
в„¬
)
,
вҲҖ
в„¬
вҲҲ
в„ұ
в„қ
n
b
\breve{\nu}_{\mathcal{M}}(f(\mathcal{B}))=\nu(\mathcal{B}),\quad\forall\mathcal{B}\in\mathcal{F}_{\mathbb{R}^{n_{b}}}
(4)
where
f
:
в„қ
n
b
вҶ’
в„і
f:\mathbb{R}^{n_{b}}\rightarrow\mathcal{M}
is the function mapping the free time series to the multivariate coherent time series, which lies in the nonlinear manifold
в„і
\mathcal{M}
Eq.В (
3
).
We extend to the definition of coherence of
Panagiotelis
et al.
(
2023
)
applying it to the nonlinear manifold instead of a linear subspace. In Fig.
2
we show how incoherent samples can be made coherent. We denote the free and constrained level marginal base forecast distributions as
ОҪ
^
b
\hat{\nu}_{b}
and
ОҪ
^
u
\hat{\nu}_{u}
respectively, and their respective probability density functions as
ПҖ
^
b
(
.
)
\hat{\pi}_{b}(.)
and
ПҖ
^
u
(
.
)
\hat{\pi}_{u}(.)
. We denote the density function of the joint distribution
ОҪ
^
\hat{\nu}
as
ПҖ
^
(
.
)
\hat{\pi}(.)
, as in
(Zambon
et al.
,
2023
)
.
3
Probabilistic Methods for Nonlinear Reconciliation
Two principled approaches for linear probabilistic reconciliation are projection
(Panagiotelis
et al.
,
2023
)
and conditioning
(Zambon
et al.
,
2023
; Corani
et al.
,
2021
)
. Here we extend both to the case of nonlinear constraints.
3.1
Reconciliation via Projection
In the linear case,
Panagiotelis
et al.
(
2023
)
defined probabilistic forecast reconciliation through the push-forward of measures. Given a base forecast distribution
ОҪ
^
\widehat{\nu}
on the space
в„қ
n
\mathbb{R}^{n}
, the reconciled measure
ОҪ
~
\widetilde{\nu}
is defined as the push-forward
ОҪ
~
=
ПҲ
#
вҖӢ
ОҪ
^
\widetilde{\nu}=\psi_{\#}\widehat{\nu}
under a reconciliation map
ПҲ
:
в„қ
n
вҶ’
рқ’®
\psi:\mathbb{R}^{n}\to\mathcal{S}
, where
рқ’®
\mathcal{S}
is the coherent subspace: for any measurable set
в„¬
вҠҶ
рқ’®
\mathcal{B}\subseteq\mathcal{S}
, the reconciled probability is given by
ОҪ
~
вҖӢ
(
в„¬
)
=
ОҪ
^
вҖӢ
(
ПҲ
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
(
в„¬
)
)
\widetilde{\nu}(\mathcal{B})=\widehat{\nu}(\psi^{-1}(\mathcal{B}))
.
In the linear literature,
ПҲ
\psi
is commonly defined as an orthogonal projection onto
рқ’®
\mathcal{S}
with respect to some distance on
в„қ
n
\mathbb{R}^{n}
.
Given a positive definite matrix
рқҗ–
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
Г—
n
\mathbf{W}\in\mathbb{R}^{n\times n}
, the distance is derived from the induced norm
вҖ–
рқҗұ
вҖ–
рқҗ–
=
рқҗұ
вҖІ
вҖӢ
рқҗ–
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
рқҗұ
\|\mathbf{x}\|_{\mathbf{W}}=\sqrt{\mathbf{x}^{\prime}\,\mathbf{W}^{-1}\,\mathbf{x}}
.
Then,
ПҲ
\psi
maps each point in
в„қ
n
\mathbb{R}^{n}
to its nearest point on
рқ’®
\mathcal{S}
:
ПҲ
вҖӢ
(
рқҗІ
^
)
=
arg
вҖӢ
min
рқҗұ
вҲҲ
рқ’®
вҒЎ
вҖ–
рқҗІ
^
вҲ’
рқҗұ
вҖ–
рқҗ–
\psi(\widehat{\mathbf{y}})=\operatorname*{arg\,min}_{\mathbf{x}\in\mathcal{S}}\,\,\|\widehat{\mathbf{y}}-\mathbf{x}\|_{\mathbf{W}}
.
When
рқҗ–
\mathbf{W}
is an estimate of the covariance matrix of the base forecast errors, this mapping corresponds to the Minimum Trace (MinT) projection.
Nespoli
et al.
(
2026
)
and
Girolimetto
et al.
(
2025
)
reconcile point forecasts satisfying nonlinear constraints by projecting them as the nearest-point mapping onto the manifold
в„і
\mathcal{M}
.
Since
в„і
\mathcal{M}
is not a linear subspace, this mapping is nonlinear.
We extend this approach to probabilistic reconciliation by defining the reconciled distribution as the push-forward of the base forecast distribution under the nonlinear nearest-point map.
Definition 2
(
Reconciled distribution via projection
)
.
Given a norm
вҲҘ
вӢ…
вҲҘ
рқҗ–
\|\cdot\|_{\mathbf{W}}
on
в„қ
n
\mathbb{R}^{n}
induced by a positive definite matrix
рқҗ–
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
Г—
n
\mathbf{W}\in\mathbb{R}^{n\times n}
,
let
ПҲ
:
в„қ
n
вҶ’
в„і
\psi:\mathbb{R}^{n}\to\mathcal{M}
be the nearest-point projection map:
ПҲ
вҖӢ
(
рқҗІ
^
)
=
arg
вҖӢ
min
рқҗұ
вҲҲ
в„і
вҒЎ
вҖ–
рқҗІ
^
вҲ’
рқҗұ
вҖ–
рқҗ–
.
\psi(\widehat{\mathbf{y}})=\operatorname*{arg\,min}_{\mathbf{x}\in\mathcal{M}}\,\,\|\widehat{\mathbf{y}}-\mathbf{x}\|_{\mathbf{W}}.
(5)
The reconciled distribution via projection is defined as
ОҪ
~
=
ПҲ
#
вҖӢ
ОҪ
^
\widetilde{\nu}=\psi_{\#}\widehat{\nu}
, the push-forward of the base forecast distribution
ОҪ
^
\widehat{\nu}
via
ПҲ
\psi
, specified by
ОҪ
~
вҖӢ
(
в„¬
)
=
ОҪ
^
вҖӢ
(
ПҲ
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
(
в„¬
)
)
,
for any measurable
вҖӢ
в„¬
вҠҶ
в„і
.
\widetilde{\nu}(\mathcal{B})=\widehat{\nu}(\psi^{-1}(\mathcal{B})),\quad\text{for any measurable }\mathcal{B}\subseteq\mathcal{M}.
(6)
As in the linear case
(Panagiotelis
et al.
,
2023
)
, we obtain samples from the reconciled distribution
ОҪ
~
\widetilde{\nu}
by mapping samples drawn from the base distribution
ОҪ
^
\widehat{\nu}
via
ПҲ
\psi
:
рқҗІ
~
(
i
)
=
ПҲ
вҖӢ
(
рқҗІ
^
(
i
)
)
,
for all
вҖӢ
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
M
\widetilde{\mathbf{y}}^{(i)}=\psi\left(\widehat{\mathbf{y}}^{(i)}\right),\quad\text{for all }i=1,\dots,M
where
(
рқҗІ
^
(
i
)
)
i
=
1
вҖӢ
вҖҰ
вҖӢ
M
вҲј
ОҪ
^
\left(\widehat{\mathbf{y}}^{(i)}\right)_{i=1\dots M}\sim\widehat{\nu}
.
If
в„і
\mathcal{M}
is a non-linear manifold, the map
ПҲ
\psi
does not admit a closed-form expression.
Hence, for each sample
рқҗІ
^
(
i
)
\widehat{\mathbf{y}}^{(i)}
we numerically solve Eq.В (
5
) via optimization,
using the Newton-Raphson algorithm as in
Nespoli
et al.
(
2026
)
.
A drawback of this approach is thus its computational cost, which linearly increases with the number of samples.
We should note that although both the mentioned works on nonlinear reconciliation for point forecasts obtain guarantees in reduction of Euclidean distance-based scores depending on local curvature conditions, we do not study how it could correspond to the probabilistic case in our experiments.
We consider 3 specifications for the matrix
рқҗ–
\mathbf{W}
, each corresponding to a different projection.
1.
OLS
: we set
рқҗ–
\mathbf{W}
as the identity matrix; this choice corresponds to the Euclidean distance in
в„қ
n
\mathbb{R}^{n}
.
However, the underlying assumption of isotropic error is inappropriate the time series have different scales.
2.
WLS
: we set
рқҗ–
\mathbf{W}
as a diagonal matrix, whose entries are the estimated variances of the base forecast errors.
This defines an anisotropic distance that accounts for the influence of the different scales present in the time series.
3.
Full
: we set
рқҗ–
\mathbf{W}
as the full covariance matrix of the base forecast errors, estimated via shrinkage as in
(Wickramasuriya
et al.
,
2019
)
.
This choice accounts for both heteroscedasticity and the correlation structure between base forecasts. This approach has optimal properties in the linear framework
(Wickramasuriya,
2024
)
, but no optimality guarantee currently exists in the nonlinear case.
3.2
Reconciliation via conditioning
This approach to probabilistic reconciliation conditions the joint base forecast distribution on the hierarchical constraints
(Zambon
et al.
,
2023
)
.
We generalize it to the nonlinear case.
In the following, we assume that
ОҪ
^
\widehat{\nu}
is a continuous distribution, and we denote by
ПҖ
^
\widehat{\pi}
its density.
Definition 3
(
Reconciled distribution via conditioning
)
.
The reconciled distribution via conditioning of the free time series is defined as the probability distribution
ОҪ
~
B
вҲҲ
рқ’«
вҖӢ
(
в„қ
n
b
)
\widetilde{\nu}_{B}\in\mathcal{P}(\mathbb{R}^{n_{b}})
with density
ПҖ
~
B
вҖӢ
(
рқҗӣ
)
вҲқ
ПҖ
^
вҖӢ
(
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗӣ
)
,
рқҗӣ
)
.
\widetilde{\pi}_{B}(\mathbf{b})\propto\widehat{\pi}(f_{u}(\mathbf{b}),\,\mathbf{b}).
(7)
The reconciled distribution via conditioning
ОҪ
~
\widetilde{\nu}
for the entire set of time series is then defined as the pushforward of
ОҪ
~
B
\widetilde{\nu}_{B}
via the FTA map:
ОҪ
~
=
f
#
вҖӢ
ОҪ
~
B
.
\widetilde{\nu}=f_{\#}\widetilde{\nu}_{B}.
(8)
We now give the intuition behind this definition, leaving the details in
B
.
Let
рқҗҳ
^
=
[
рқҗ”
^
вҖІ
,
рқҗҒ
^
вҖІ
]
вҖІ
{\widehat{\mathbf{Y}}=\left[\widehat{\mathbf{U}}^{\prime},\,\widehat{\mathbf{B}}^{\prime}\right]^{\prime}}
be a random vector distributed as the base forecast distribution
ОҪ
^
\widehat{\nu}
.
Eq.В (
7
) provides the density of the conditional distribution of
рқҗҒ
^
\widehat{\mathbf{B}}
, given the constraints:
рқҗҒ
^
|
(
рқҗ”
^
вҲ’
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗҒ
^
)
=
0
)
вҲј
ОҪ
~
B
.
\widehat{\mathbf{B}}\;\Big|\left(\widehat{\mathbf{U}}-f_{u}(\widehat{\mathbf{B}})=0\right)\;\;\sim\;\;\widetilde{\nu}_{B}.
(9)
Then, Eq.В (
8
) follows directly from
the definition of coherent forecast distribution (Def.
1
).
Given samples for the free time series
рқҗӣ
~
(
i
)
вҲј
ОҪ
~
B
\widetilde{\mathbf{b}}^{(i)}\sim\widetilde{\nu}_{B}
, we can thus obtain coherent samples for all the series by applying the FTA map to each sample:
рқҗІ
~
(
i
)
=
f
вҖӢ
(
рқҗӣ
~
(
i
)
)
\widetilde{\mathbf{y}}^{(i)}=f\big(\widetilde{\mathbf{b}}^{(i)}\big)
.
As in the linear case, reconciliation via conditioning can be interpreted as slicing the incoherent joint density over the coherent manifold
в„і
\mathcal{M}
(Fig.
3
).
Since the density in Eq.В (
7
) is generally not available in closed-form, we need to resort to sampling techniques.
We propose an algorithm inspired by the Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF)
(Julier and Uhlmann,
2004
)
.
Figure 3
:
Representation of nonlinear probabilistic reconciliation via conditioning
Unscented Transform
Corani
et al.
(
2021
)
showed the link, in the linear case, between probabilistic forecast reconciliation and the update step of the Kalman filter.
We extend this idea to nonlinear reconciliation, proposing an algorithm based on the Unscented Transform used by the Unscented Kalman Filter (
UKF
)
(Julier and Uhlmann,
2004
; van der Linde and Labbe,
2019
)
. We thus use the UKF as a numerical method for approximating the conditional distribution induced by the nonlinear constraint rather than as a dynamical filtering procedure. The basic idea is to approximate the probability distribution of the base forecast of the free time series by replacing it with a small deterministic set of
sigma points
whose mean and covariance coincide with those of the original distribution. These points are then propagated through the nonlinear map
f
u
(
.
)
f_{u}(.)
, and the mean and covariance of the transformed cloud are used to approximate the transformed distribution. The resulting transformed points are then summarized to obtain the quantities needed for a Kalman-style update, which produces the reconciled mean and covariance of the free-level forecasts.
We approximate both the incoherent and the reconciled distribution of the free time series with Gaussian distributions. We then treat the base forecasts of the constrained time series as noisy observations of the free time series.
рқҗ”
^
=
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗҒ
)
+
Оө
u
,
\hat{\mathbf{U}}=f_{u}(\mathbf{B})+\varepsilon^{u},
(10)
where
Оө
u
вҲј
рқ’©
вҖӢ
(
0
,
ОЈ
^
U
)
\varepsilon^{u}\sim\mathcal{N}(0,\hat{\Sigma}_{U})
represents uncertainty in the constrained forecasts.
We assume the joint predictive distribution of the free-level base forecasts to be Gaussian
p
вҖӢ
(
рқҗҒ
)
вүЎ
рқ’©
вҖӢ
(
рқҗӣ
^
,
ОЈ
^
B
)
,
p(\mathbf{B})\equiv\mathcal{N}(\hat{\mathbf{b}},\hat{\Sigma}_{B}),
(11)
where
ОЈ
^
B
\hat{\Sigma}_{B}
is estimated from in-sample residuals, analogously to
minT
(Wickramasuriya
et al.
,
2019
)
. Under this assumption, the Unscented Transform yields a Gaussian approximation to the joint distribution of the free and constrained base forecasts:
[
рқҗҒ
рқҗ”
^
]
вүҲ
рқ’©
вҖӢ
(
[
рқҗӣ
^
рқҗ®
вҲ’
]
,
[
ОЈ
^
B
P
b
,
u
P
b
,
u
T
S
u
]
)
,
\begin{bmatrix}\mathbf{B}\\
\hat{\mathbf{U}}\end{bmatrix}\approx\mathcal{N}\left(\begin{bmatrix}\hat{\mathbf{b}}\\
\mathbf{u}^{-}\end{bmatrix},\begin{bmatrix}\hat{\Sigma}_{B}&P_{b,u}\\
P_{b,u}^{T}&S_{u}\end{bmatrix}\right),
where
рқҗ®
вҲ’
\mathbf{u}^{-}
is the transformed mean of the sigma points,
P
b
,
u
P_{b,u}
is the approximate cross-covariance between
рқҗҒ
\mathbf{B}
and
рқҗ”
^
\hat{\mathbf{U}}
, and
S
u
S_{u}
is the approximate covariance of
рқҗ”
^
\hat{\mathbf{U}}
. The reconciled distribution for the free time series is then obtained by conditioning this approximate joint Gaussian on the observed upper-level base forecasts
рқҗ”
^
=
рқҗ®
^
\hat{\mathbf{U}}=\hat{\mathbf{u}}
:
p
вҖӢ
(
рқҗҒ
вҲЈ
рқҗ”
^
=
рқҗ®
^
)
,
p(\mathbf{B}\mid\hat{\mathbf{U}}=\hat{\mathbf{u}}),
(12)
This leads to a Gaussian approximation of the reconciled distribution for the free-level forecasts
ОҪ
~
b
\tilde{\nu}_{b}
given by a
рқ’©
вҖӢ
(
b
~
,
ОЈ
~
B
)
\mathcal{N}(\tilde{b},\tilde{\Sigma}_{B})
with,
рқҗӣ
~
=
рқҗӣ
^
+
K
вҖӢ
(
рқҗ®
^
вҲ’
рқҗ®
вҲ’
)
\displaystyle\tilde{\mathbf{b}}=\hat{\mathbf{b}}+K(\hat{\mathbf{u}}-\mathbf{u}^{-})
ОЈ
~
B
=
ОЈ
^
B
вҲ’
K
вҖӢ
S
u
вҖӢ
K
T
\displaystyle\tilde{\Sigma}_{B}=\hat{\Sigma}_{B}-KS_{u}K^{T}
The detailed derivation and the description of the UKF algorithm are provided in
A
and Algorithm
1
.
We eventually sample from
ОҪ
~
b
\tilde{\nu}_{b}
and apply the function
f
(
.
)
f(.)
to each sample to obtain the reconciled samples for the whole set of time series.
In
C
we show that the UKF indeed computes reconciliation via conditioning.
Algorithm 1
Reconciliation via Unscented Transform
1:
ПҮ
0
=
b
^
\chi_{0}=\hat{b}
2:
for
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
n
b
i=1,\dots,{n_{b}}
(compute
Пғ
\sigma
-points)
do
3:
ПҮ
i
=
b
^
+
Оі
вҖӢ
О»
+
n
b
вҖӢ
[
ОЈ
^
B
]
i
\chi_{i}=\hat{b}+\gamma\sqrt{\lambda+{n_{b}}}\,[\sqrt{\hat{\Sigma}_{B}}]_{i}
4:
ПҮ
n
b
+
i
=
b
^
вҲ’
Оі
вҖӢ
О»
+
n
b
вҖӢ
[
ОЈ
^
B
]
i
\chi_{{n_{b}}+i}=\hat{b}-\gamma\sqrt{\lambda+{n_{b}}}\,[\sqrt{\hat{\Sigma}_{B}}]_{i}
5:
end
for
6:
W
m
0
=
О»
n
b
+
О»
W_{m}^{0}=\dfrac{\lambda}{{n_{b}}+\lambda}
7:
W
c
0
=
О»
n
b
+
О»
+
(
1
вҲ’
Оұ
2
+
ОІ
)
W_{c}^{0}=\dfrac{\lambda}{{n_{b}}+\lambda}+(1-\alpha^{2}+\beta)
8:
for
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
2
вҖӢ
n
b
i=1,\dots,2{n_{b}}
(compute weights
W
m
j
W^{j}_{m}
and
W
c
j
W^{j}_{c}
)
do
9:
W
m
i
=
W
c
i
=
1
2
вҖӢ
(
n
b
+
О»
)
W_{m}^{i}=W_{c}^{i}=\dfrac{1}{2({n_{b}}+\lambda)}
10:
end
for
11:
for
j
=
0
,
1
,
вҖҰ
,
2
вҖӢ
n
b
j=0,1,\dots,2{n_{b}}
do
12:
z
j
=
f
u
вҖӢ
(
ПҮ
j
)
z_{j}=f_{u}(\chi_{j})
13:
end
for
14:
transformed mean:
u
вҲ’
=
вҲ‘
j
=
0
2
вҖӢ
n
b
W
m
j
вҖӢ
z
j
u^{-}=\sum_{j=0}^{2{n_{b}}}W_{m}^{j}z_{j}
15:
cross covariance:
P
b
,
u
=
вҲ‘
j
=
0
2
вҖӢ
n
b
W
c
j
вҖӢ
(
ПҮ
j
вҲ’
b
^
)
вҖӢ
(
z
j
вҲ’
u
вҲ’
)
T
P_{b,u}=\sum_{j=0}^{2{n_{b}}}W_{c}^{j}(\chi_{j}-\hat{b})(z_{j}-u^{-})^{T}
16:
covariance:
S
u
=
ОЈ
^
U
+
вҲ‘
j
=
0
2
вҖӢ
n
b
W
c
j
вҖӢ
(
z
j
вҲ’
u
вҲ’
)
вҖӢ
(
z
j
вҲ’
u
вҲ’
)
T
S_{u}=\hat{\Sigma}_{U}+\sum_{j=0}^{2{n_{b}}}W_{c}^{j}(z_{j}-u^{-})(z_{j}-u^{-})^{T}
17:
Kalman gain:
K
=
P
b
,
u
вҖӢ
S
u
вҲ’
1
K=P_{b,u}S_{u}^{-1}
18:
Reconciled mean
:
b
~
=
b
^
+
K
вҖӢ
(
u
^
вҲ’
u
вҲ’
)
\tilde{b}=\hat{b}+K(\hat{u}-u^{-})
19:
Reconciled covariance
:
ОЈ
~
B
=
ОЈ
^
B
вҲ’
K
вҖӢ
S
u
вҖӢ
K
T
\tilde{\Sigma}_{B}=\hat{\Sigma}_{B}-KS_{u}K^{T}
An analytical closed-form solution for the mean and covariance of the reconciled distribution could be obtained by using the first order Taylor approximation for the UKF corresponding to the Extended Kalman Filter (EKF)
(Julier and Uhlmann,
1997
,
2004
; van der Linde and Labbe,
2019
)
. The reconciled mean and covariance in that case are respectively
рқҗӣ
~
=
рқҗӣ
^
+
K
вҖӢ
(
рқҗ®
^
вҲ’
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗӣ
^
)
)
\tilde{\mathbf{b}}=\hat{\mathbf{b}}+K\left(\hat{\mathbf{u}}-f_{u}(\hat{\mathbf{b}})\right)
and
ОЈ
~
B
=
ОЈ
^
B
вҲ’
K
вҖӢ
(
J
вҖӢ
ОЈ
^
B
вҖӢ
J
T
+
ОЈ
^
U
)
вҖӢ
K
T
\tilde{\Sigma}_{B}=\hat{\Sigma}_{B}-K\left(J\hat{\Sigma}_{B}J^{T}+\hat{\Sigma}_{U}\right)K^{T}
which requires computing the Jacobian of the manifold.
However, the UKF is more accurate than the EKF especially with strong nonlinearities, without requiring the Jacobian
(Labbe,
2020
, Sec.В 11.5)
.
For this reason, we do not include an EKF-based reconciliation method in our experiments.
3.3
Limitations
We acknowledge that the proposed methods are not suitable for all scenarios. In particular, reconciliation via projection is mainly designed for continuous forecast distributions, while discrete and mixed-type time series with nonlinear constraints remain more challenging. As seen in the linear case by
Zhang
et al.
(
2024
)
, modifying projection to work with discrete time series requires ad hoc choices and results in computationally expensive algorithms. Conditioning has instead been applied, in the linear case, to reconcile constraints related to intermittent, discrete or mixed time series
(Corani
et al.
,
2024
; Zambon
et al.
,
2023
,
2024b
)
.
However, our specific algorithm based on UKF is unsuitable to reconcile intermittent or discrete time series with nonlinear constraints due to its underlying Gaussian assumption. We leave this problem for future research.
Both the projection (FULL) approach and the reconciliation via conditioning (UKF) can model the dependence between the free and constrained time series using linear measures of correlation; however this is not fully appropriate and better approaches to account for nonlinear dependencies should be tested in the future.
4
Experiments
We compare nonlinear reconciliation via
projection
and via
conditioning
in the following experiments:
1.
simulated data with different nonlinear constraints;
2.
real data of immigration and citizenship rates in Switzerland;
3.
real data of the Australian tourism dataset for the tourism rate defined as the ratio between the number of tourists in a particular region and the total number of tourists in the country.
Probabilistic bottom-up
As a benchmark method we consider a nonlinear
probabilistic bottom-up
(
PBU
), whose reconciled distribution is obtained by applying FTA (
f
(
.
)
f(.)
) to each sample drawn from the joint distribution of the free time series. This nonlinear version of the PBU is used, which is the probabilistic counterpart of the bottom-up method used in the experiments of
Girolimetto
et al.
(
2025
)
. Given the
i
i
-th sample
b
^
(
i
)
\hat{b}^{(i)}
drawn from the the base forecast of the free time series, PBU provides the following coherent values for free and constrained time series:
b
~
P
вҖӢ
B
вҖӢ
U
(
i
)
=
b
^
(
i
)
\displaystyle\tilde{b}^{(i)}_{PBU}=\hat{b}^{(i)}
u
~
P
вҖӢ
B
вҖӢ
U
(
i
)
=
f
вҖӢ
(
b
^
(
i
)
)
.
\displaystyle\tilde{u}^{(i)}_{PBU}=f(\hat{b}^{(i)}).
Evaluation metrics
We use the
energy score
to score the joint predictive distributions, which is a proper scoring rule
(Gneiting and Raftery,
2007
)
. If
F
F
is the multivariate predictive distribution and
y
вҲҲ
в„қ
n
y\in\mathbb{R}^{n}
is the observed ground truth, then we estimate the energy score for
M
M
samples
x
(
j
)
x^{(j)}
from
F
F
as
ES
вҖӢ
(
F
,
y
)
=
1
M
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
j
=
1
M
вҖ–
x
(
j
)
вҲ’
y
вҖ–
2
вҲ’
1
2
вҖӢ
M
2
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
j
=
1
M
вҲ‘
k
=
1
M
вҖ–
x
(
j
)
вҲ’
x
(
k
)
вҖ–
2
.
\text{ES}(F,y)=\frac{1}{M}\sum_{j=1}^{M}\|x^{(j)}-y\|_{2}-\frac{1}{2M^{2}}\sum_{j=1}^{M}\sum_{k=1}^{M}\|x^{(j)}-x^{(k)}\|_{2}.
where
вҲҘ
.
вҲҘ
2
\|.\|_{2}
denotes the Euclidean norm.
The Energy Score is scale-dependent and hence it is generally affected by the time series with the largest values (for example there is a huge difference in scale for the variables of the Swiss demography dataset as seen in Fig.
5
). We also report a score based on the geometric mean of the relative CRPS across time series:
RelCRPS
method
=
(
вҲҸ
j
=
1
n
CRPS
j
,
method
CRPS
j
,
base
)
1
/
n
,
\mathrm{RelCRPS}_{\text{method}}=\left(\prod_{j=1}^{n}\frac{\mathrm{CRPS}_{j,\text{method}}}{\mathrm{CRPS}_{j,\text{base}}}\right)^{1/n},
where
CRPS
j
,
method
=
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
CRPS
вҖӢ
(
F
^
j
,
t
method
,
y
j
,
t
)
,
\mathrm{CRPS}_{j,\text{method}}=\frac{1}{T}\sum_{t=1}^{T}\mathrm{CRPS}\!\left(\hat{F}^{\,\text{method}}_{j,t},\,y_{j,t}\right),
and analogously for
CRPS
j
,
base
\mathrm{CRPS}_{j,\text{base}}
.
Here,
T
T
denotes the number of rolling windows (or evaluation time steps),
F
^
j
,
t
method
\hat{F}^{\,\text{method}}_{j,t}
is the predictive distribution produced by the considered method for series
j
j
at time step
t
t
, and
y
j
,
t
y_{j,t}
is the corresponding observed value
(Girolimetto
et al.
,
2024
)
.
For a univariate predictive distribution
F
F
and the observed ground truth
y
вҲҲ
в„қ
y\in\mathbb{R}
we compute the CRPS as
Gneiting and Raftery (
2007
)
:
CRPS
вҖӢ
(
F
,
y
)
=
1
M
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
j
=
1
M
|
x
(
j
)
вҲ’
y
|
вҲ’
1
2
вҖӢ
M
2
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
j
=
1
M
вҲ‘
k
=
1
M
|
x
(
j
)
вҲ’
x
(
k
)
|
.
{\text{CRPS}}(F,y)=\frac{1}{M}\sum_{j=1}^{M}|x^{(j)}-y|-\frac{1}{2M^{2}}\sum_{j=1}^{M}\sum_{k=1}^{M}|x^{(j)}-x^{(k)}|.
For the simulations we also consider the relative Energy score:
RelES
m
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
t
вҖӢ
h
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
d
=
ES
m
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
t
вҖӢ
h
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
d
ES
b
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
s
вҖӢ
e
\text{RelES}_{method}=\frac{\text{ES}_{method}}{\text{ES}_{base}}
4.1
Synthethic data
We compare the reconciliation methods on different nonlinear surfaces in
в„қ
3
\mathbb{R}^{3}
. We generate two free-level time series
B
1
,
t
B_{1,t}
and
B
2
,
t
B_{2,t}
as
A
вҖӢ
R
вҖӢ
(
1
)
AR(1)
processes:
B
1
,
t
=
П•
1
вҖӢ
B
1
,
t
вҲ’
1
+
Пө
1
,
t
\displaystyle B_{1,t}=\phi_{1}B_{1,t-1}+\epsilon_{1,t}
B
2
,
t
=
П•
2
вҖӢ
B
2
,
t
вҲ’
1
+
Пө
2
,
t
\displaystyle B_{2,t}=\phi_{2}B_{2,t-1}+\epsilon_{2,t}
where
Пө
1
,
t
вҲј
рқ’©
вҖӢ
(
0
,
0.1
2
)
\epsilon_{1,t}\sim\mathcal{N}(0,0.1^{2})
and
Пө
2
,
t
вҲј
рқ’©
вҖӢ
(
0
,
0.1
2
)
\epsilon_{2,t}\sim\mathcal{N}(0,0.1^{2})
. We set
П•
1
=
П•
2
=
0.9
\phi_{1}=\phi_{2}=0.9
for all the surfaces and we generate data for
T
=
1000
T=1000
time steps. Using this structure for the free level time series,
B
t
=
[
B
1
,
t
,
B
2
,
t
]
T
B_{t}=[B_{1,t},B_{2,t}]^{T}
for the surfaces
paraboloid
,
saddle
, and
ripples
, defined in Tab.
2
. Fig.
4
shows the surfaces in the 3-D Euclidean space.
Surface
paraboloid
saddle
ripples
Constraint
U
t
=
B
1
,
t
2
+
B
2
,
t
2
\quad U_{t}=B_{1,t}^{2}+B_{2,t}^{2}\quad
U
t
=
B
1
,
t
2
вҲ’
B
2
,
t
2
\quad U_{t}=B_{1,t}^{2}-B_{2,t}^{2}\quad
U
t
=
sin
вҒЎ
B
1
,
t
+
cos
вҒЎ
B
2
,
t
\quad U_{t}=\sin B_{1,t}+\cos B_{2,t}\quad
Table 2
:
Nonlinear surfaces for the simulation study
Figure 4
:
Simulation study: 3-D surfaces generated by the synthetic data - ripples (top left), saddle (top right), and paraboloid (bottom). The black dots on the surfaces denote the data points.
Each time series is split into training and test sets using an 80%вҖ“20% chronological partition. Base forecasts are then constructed separately for
B
1
,
t
+
h
B_{1,t+h}
,
B
2
,
t
+
h
B_{2,t+h}
, and
U
t
+
h
U_{t+h}
using only the training data. We formulate one-step-ahead forecasting as a supervised regression problem, where the value at time
t
+
h
t+h
is predicted from the lagged observation at time
t
t
. We use a random forest regressor with lag 1 for forecasting each series. To obtain probabilistic base forecasts, we apply a joint residual bootstrap based on the in-sample residual vectors of the three series. We jointly resample the residuals as done by
Panagiotelis
et al.
(
2023
)
to preserve the contemporaneous dependence structure across
U
t
+
h
U_{t+h}
,
B
1
,
t
+
h
B_{1,t+h}
, and
B
2
,
t
+
h
B_{2,t+h}
.
Results
Methods
CRPS
Energy Score
paraboloid
saddle
ripples
paraboloid
saddle
ripples
Baseline
Base
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
PBU
1.01
1.02
1.02
0.99
1.00
0.99
Projection
OLS
0.97
0.98
0.93
0.95
0.96
0.90
WLS
0.96
0.97
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.91
FULL
0.96
0.97
0.96
0.94
0.95
0.93
Conditioning
UKF
0.96
0.95
0.91
0.94
0.94
0.89
Table 3
:
Relative Energy Score and CRPS for the simulation study. The best method is highlighted in bold.
Tab.
3
summarizes the results averaging over the different splits of the data. Probabilistic reconciliation by both via projection and conditioning improves the Energy Score and CRPS compared to the base forecast and the probabilistic bottom-up. In general, the UKF is slightly more accurate than projection on both CRPS and Energy score. Among projections, the
WLS
generally works better than
OLS
as it also happens in linear reconciliation
(Athanasopoulos
et al.
,
2024
; Wickramasuriya
et al.
,
2019
)
. We do not see a further improvement from WLS to FULL possibly because the free-level time series were independently generated and because correlation might be an
inappropriate measure of dependence in our cases.
Computation times
The UKF approach is much faster than projection, as it avoids running an optimization for each sample. Indeed, Tab.
4
shows that the UKF is about three orders of magnitude faster than projection for all the surfaces considered in the simulations with 2000 samples.
Computation time
(seconds)
Method
paraboloid
saddle
ripples
Projection (FULL)
1.83
1.83
1.10
1.10
1.15
1.15
UKF
1.6
Г—
10
вҲ’
3
1.6\times 10^{-3}
1.6
Г—
10
вҲ’
3
1.6\times 10^{-3}
2.2
Г—
10
вҲ’
3
2.2\times 10^{-3}
Table 4
:
Average runtime of reconciliation for different surfaces computed on a single time step.
4.2
Reconciliation of Swiss socio-demographic ratios
Figure 5
:
Number of acquired citizenships per year, existing foreigners and the citizenship ratio for Canton Ticino.
We now consider a case study of some socio-demographic ratios of Switzerland. In particular we consider immigration rate and acquired citizenship rate.
We obtain the data from the
Swiss Federal Statistical Office (FSO)
2
2
2
https://www.pxweb.bfs.admin.ch/api/v1/en/px-x-0102020000_104/px-x-0102020000_104.px
of Switzerland.
Switzerland is subdivided into 26 Cantons.
We extract, for each Canton and for Switzerland, annual counts of (i) population (as recorded on 1 January), (ii) immigration flows, and (iii) acquired Swiss citizenships (naturalisations) from years
1981
to
2024
. These correspond to the demographic components required to construct the immigration-to-population ratio and the citizenship-to-population ratio. The structure of the constraints for the considered rates follow a similar pattern. We show the structure for immigration in Fig.
6
for two Cantons out of the 26 in Switzerland.
P
P
,
I
I
and
R
R
respectively denote the foreign population, number of immigrants and the immigration rates, with the superscripts
A
вҖӢ
G
AG
,
Z
вҖӢ
H
ZH
and
C
вҖӢ
H
CH
denoting respectively Cantons Aargau, ZГјrich and the whole country.
I
C
вҖӢ
H
I^{CH}
R
C
вҖӢ
H
R^{CH}
P
C
вҖӢ
H
P^{CH}
I
A
вҖӢ
G
I^{AG}
вӢҜ
\cdots
I
Z
вҖӢ
H
I^{ZH}
R
A
вҖӢ
G
R^{AG}
вӢҜ
\cdots
R
Z
вҖӢ
H
R^{ZH}
P
A
вҖӢ
G
P^{AG}
вӢҜ
\cdots
P
Z
вҖӢ
H
P^{ZH}
Figure 6
:
The structure of immigration rates
disaggregated by Swiss Cantons contains both linear (solid) and nonlinear (dashed) constraints. The orange nodes represent the free time series, and the green nodes represent the constrained time series.
We compute the base probabilistic forecasts for each time series using
Auto ARIMA
(Hyndman and Khandakar,
2008
; Hyndman
et al.
,
2026
)
. For every region and target variable, we produce forecasts using a fixed-length training window of
12
12
years. We adopt rolling windows that advances by one year at a time and we have
30
30
rolling windows in total. We produce forecasts for the horizon
h
=
1
h=1
, i.e., for the next one year. We draw
M
=
1000
M=1000
samples out of the base forecast distribution, which we reconcile using the three approaches mentioned before.
Results
Method
Dataset
Immigration
Citizenship
Baseline
Base
1
1
PBU
0.95
1
Projection
OLS
1.21
1.36
WLS
0.94
0.99
FULL
0.93
0.97
Conditioning
UKF
0.91
0.96
Table 5
:
GM of the relative CRPS compared to base forecast for the two Swiss demographic datasets
Tab.
5
summarizes the results. All the reconciliation methods other than the OLS performs better than the base forecast and the probabilistic bottom-up. Also in this case, UKF is the best performing reconciliation approach, improving the base forecast by
9.4
%
9.4\%
and
3.7
%
3.7\%
. The huge difference in scale is the reason for the poor performance of OLS. We also observe that similar to the linear case, for these two case studies involving the nonlinear ratio constraint, the order of the scores in direction of improvement for the projection method goes from OLS to
WLS
to FULL - attributed to the better modeling of the covariance structure between the time series. This was also found partly in the point forecast setting in the works of
Nespoli
et al.
(
2026
); Girolimetto
et al.
(
2025
)
. These results are also in-line with what we observe in the simulation study, which suggested conditioning-based reconciliation methods work as well as the projection approach - or at times are even better in terms of forecasting accuracy. A similar kind of results can be observed in the nonlinear level (Cantonal ratio) of the two datasets reported in the
D
(Tab.
9
). Fig.
7
shows a Canton-wise summary of the relative CRPS on the immigration and citizenship ratio where we compare UKF to the two baselines. A green shade indicates an improvement over the baseline (darker = better), and otherwise we mark it as a red shade (darker = worse). We can observe that for the immigration data, the improvement is seen over all the Cantons against both the baselines. In case of the citizenship dataset, we see an improvement over the base forecast for most of the Cantons - and the scale of the accuracy being worse is much lower than the improvements. UKF generally improves the relative score over the PBU as well.
Figure 7
:
Improvement for UKF against the Base forecast and PBU for each Canton on the two datasets.
Computation time
(seconds)
Method
Immigration
Citizenship
Projection (FULL)
5.19
5.19
4.07
4.07
UKF
6.3
Г—
10
вҲ’
2
6.3\times 10^{-2}
6.7
Г—
10
вҲ’
2
6.7\times 10^{-2}
Table 6
:
Average runtime of reconciliation for the Swiss datasets computed on a single time step.
Tab.
6
shows the average runtime (in seconds) for the two approaches of reconciliation done with 1000 sample points. The UKF has a runtime which is faster than projection (FULL) by 3 orders of magnitude - similar to what we have observed for the simulation study.
4.3
Australian Tourism Ratio
We now create a system of time series with nonlinear constraints on the Australian Tourism dataset available in the R package
tsibble
(OвҖҷHara-Wild
et al.
,
2022
)
. We consider the portion of the dataset which contains the quarterly tourism counts from the 8 different states of Australia. The data comprises of observations over 20 years (80 quarters) from the first quarter of 1998 to the last quarter of 2017. Fig.
8
shows the structure of the data, where the free and constrained time series are color coded as light orange and light green respectively. We create A new variable (tourism rate) as:
Rate
s
вҖӢ
t
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
t
вҖӢ
e
,
t
=
#
вҖӢ
Tourism
s
вҖӢ
t
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
t
вҖӢ
e
,
t
#
вҖӢ
Tourism
A
вҖӢ
U
вҖӢ
S
,
t
\text{Rate}_{state,t}=\frac{\#\text{Tourism}_{state,t}}{\#\text{Tourism}_{AUS,t}}
(13)
Total tourism
T
t
T_{t}
NSW rate
R
t
(
1
)
=
B
t
(
1
)
T
t
R_{t}^{(1)}=\dfrac{B_{t}^{(1)}}{T_{t}}
VIC rate
R
t
(
2
)
=
B
t
(
2
)
T
t
R_{t}^{(2)}=\dfrac{B_{t}^{(2)}}{T_{t}}
вӢҜ
\cdots
TAS rate
R
t
(
8
)
=
B
t
(
8
)
T
t
R_{t}^{(8)}=\dfrac{B_{t}^{(8)}}{T_{t}}
NSW tourism
B
t
(
1
)
B_{t}^{(1)}
VIC tourism
B
t
(
2
)
B_{t}^{(2)}
вӢҜ
\cdots
TAS tourism
B
t
(
8
)
B_{t}^{(8)}
Figure 8
:
Structure of the Australian tourism case study. The bottom level contains quarterly tourism counts for each state, the top level contains the national total, and an additional nonlinear level is defined through the state tourism rates
R
t
(
i
)
=
B
t
(
i
)
/
T
t
R_{t}^{(i)}=B_{t}^{(i)}/T_{t}
.
We generate base forecasts using
Auto ARIMA
. Using rolling windows we take 40 splits of data to fit the base forecast distribution with a forecast horizon
h
=
1
h=1
.
Results
Method
RelCRPS
Baseline
Base
1
PBU
1.03
Projection
OLS
1.09
WLS
1.02
FULL
1.02
Conditioning
UKF
0.97
Table 7
:
GM of the relative CRPS on the Australian tourism dataset against the base forecast
Table
7
summarizes the results.
The third column in table
7
summarizes the results. We observe a similar trend - reconciliation via conditioning provides a better score against the base forecast. The UKF achieves an improvement of
2.6
%
2.6\%
over the base forecast, and it turns out to be the only reconciliation method that improves the score against the base forecast. Although the projection-based methods (other than the OLS due to scaling issue) achieves a better score than the PBU in general, they do not improve on the base forecast.
Method
Computation time
(seconds)
Projection (FULL)
2.46
2.46
UKF
2.8
Г—
10
вҲ’
3
2.8\times 10^{-3}
Table 8
:
Average runtime of reconciliation for the Australian tourism computed on a single time step.
Tab.
8
shows the runtime for this data computed on a single time step. The UKF reconciles faster than the projection (FULL) by 4 orders of magnitude, for a sample size of 1000.
5
Conclusions
We studied nonlinear probabilistic forecast reconciliation for the first time,
extending (i) reconciliation
via projection
and (ii)
via conditioning
to the nonlinear setting.
Reconciliation in general improves the accuracy compared to both the base forecast and probabilistic bottom-up. However, we conclude that these results are still empirical, and we have not explored the connection between the improvement guarantees that were obtained using the projection method for the point forecasts
(Nespoli
et al.
,
2026
; Girolimetto
et al.
,
2025
)
and our probabilistic setting.
In our experiments, the UKF-based reconciliation via conditioning outperforms, slightly but consistently, any other method in terms of probabilistic scores.
It also provides a faster alternative to the projection method, since it does not need to go through the optimization iterations. In particular we observe faster computation in 3-4 orders of magnitudes on a single time step as shown in Tab.
4
, Tab.
6
, and Tab.
8
.
These methods, however come with some limitations. As mentioned above, the
UKF
might fail if the assumption of the free-level time series being Gaussian does not hold true, since that is the core idea of that approach. The projection-based method is dependent on numerical methods for projecting the samples onto the nonlinear manifold, and it might sometime have the issue of divergence or slow convergence which we did not improve upon. Although we mention the FrechГЁt mean as a probable new point forecast, we do not explore it much in this paper and we keep that as a future research direction.
Although we use relative versions of the CRPS and Energy Scores for our experiments both for the simulations and the case studies, sometimes using these Euclidean-distance based scores might lead to misleading results as shown by
Nespoli
et al.
(
2026
)
. Developing a new geodesic-distance based proper scoring rule to evaluate the reconciled forecast distribution, which is more meaningful on the nonlinear manifold, is thus important and can be considered as another future research direction that we keep out of this paper.
Acknowledgements
Research funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant
200021
вҖӢ
_
вҖӢ
212164
200021\_212164
), the European Union (project: 101160720 вҖ” ENERGENIUS), and the Swiss State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation (SERI) in the context of the Horizon Europe research and innovation programme project DR-RISE (Grant Agreement No 101104154) and REEFLEX (Horizon Europe, Grant Agreement No. 101096192).
Appendix A
Reconciliation via UKF computation
Computation of
Пғ
\sigma
-points
Consider the assumptions given in
3.2
. To propagate the free state through a nonlinear function, we first generate a set of
sigma points
that represent the uncertainty of the state. The Unscented Transform (UT) is used for this purpose, which approximates the mean and covariance of a nonlinear transformation of a Gaussian random variable. The prior state mean corresponds to the mean of the free-level base predictive distribution
b
^
t
+
h
\hat{b}_{t+h}
. The prior state covariance is estimated from the Shaffer-Strimmer covariance of the fitted in-sample residuals as
ОЈ
^
B
,
h
\hat{\Sigma}_{B,h}
. The
Пғ
\sigma
-points are computed as
ПҮ
j
\chi_{j}
вҖҷs,
j
=
0
,
вҖҰ
,
2
вҖӢ
m
j=0,\dots,2m
-
m
m
being the number of free time series in the following way:
ПҮ
0
\displaystyle\chi_{0}
=
b
^
t
+
h
,
\displaystyle=\hat{b}_{t+h},\quad
ПҮ
i
\displaystyle\chi_{i}
=
b
^
t
+
h
+
Оі
.
О»
+
m
.
[
ОЈ
^
B
,
h
]
,
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
m
\displaystyle=\hat{b}_{t+h}+\gamma.\sqrt{\lambda+m}.[\sqrt{\hat{\Sigma}_{B,h}}],\quad i=1,\dots,m
ПҮ
m
+
i
\displaystyle\chi_{m+i}
=
b
^
t
+
h
вҲ’
Оі
.
О»
+
m
.
[
ОЈ
^
B
,
h
]
,
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
m
\displaystyle=\hat{b}_{t+h}-\gamma.\sqrt{\lambda+m}.[\sqrt{\hat{\Sigma}_{B,h}}],\quad i=1,\dots,m
Here
О»
=
Оұ
2
вҖӢ
(
m
+
Оә
)
вҲ’
m
\lambda=\alpha^{2}(m+\kappa)-m
;
Оұ
\alpha
controls the dispersion of the
Пғ
\sigma
-points and
Оі
=
m
+
О»
\gamma=\sqrt{m+\lambda}
. The notation
[
A
]
[\sqrt{A}]
denotes the Cholesky decomposition of
A
A
.
Computation of weights
Each sigma point is assigned a weight for the transformed mean and covariance computations. These weights are used to combine the sigma points and obtain the transformed mean and covariance after applying the nonlinear function
f
f
. Denoting the weights for the mean and covariance as
W
m
W_{m}
and
W
c
W_{c}
, they are computed as
W
m
0
\displaystyle W^{0}_{m}
=
О»
m
+
О»
,
\displaystyle=\frac{\lambda}{m+\lambda},
W
c
0
\displaystyle W^{0}_{c}
=
О»
m
+
О»
+
(
1
вҲ’
Оұ
2
+
ОІ
)
,
\displaystyle=\frac{\lambda}{m+\lambda}+(1-\alpha^{2}+\beta),
W
m
i
\displaystyle W^{i}_{m}
=
W
c
i
=
О»
2
вҖӢ
(
m
+
О»
)
,
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
2
вҖӢ
m
.
\displaystyle=W^{i}_{c}=\frac{\lambda}{2(m+\lambda)},\quad i=1,\dots,2m.
Here,
Оұ
,
ОІ
,
Оі
\alpha,\beta,\gamma
all are hyper-parameters that control the spread of the
Пғ
\sigma
-points and their contribution to the mean and the covariance.
Obtaining the Kalman Gain
The Kalman Gain
K
K
is used to combine the prior distribution and the measurement in a way that minimizes the posterior uncertainty. It essentially determines how much weight should be given to the prediction versus the observation. It is computed as
K
=
P
b
,
u
вҖӢ
S
u
вҲ’
1
.
K=P_{b,u}S^{-1}_{u}.
(14)
Let us denote the transformed sigma points in the observation space as,
z
j
=
f
вҖӢ
(
ПҮ
j
)
z_{j}=f(\chi_{j})
. Let us also denote the mean and the estimated covariance of the constrained base predictive distribution as
u
^
t
+
h
\hat{u}_{t+h}
and
ОЈ
^
U
,
h
\hat{\Sigma}_{U,h}
respectively. The predicted mean of the transformed observations is computed as
u
t
+
h
вҲ’
=
вҲ‘
i
=
0
2
вҖӢ
m
W
m
i
вҖӢ
z
i
u^{-}_{t+h}=\sum_{i=0}^{2m}W_{m}^{i}z_{i}
. Then
P
b
,
u
P_{b,u}
is the cross-covariance between the sigma points in the free state space and the observation space, which is computed as:
P
b
,
u
=
вҲ‘
i
=
0
2
вҖӢ
m
W
c
i
.
(
ПҮ
i
вҲ’
b
^
t
+
h
)
вҖӢ
(
z
i
вҲ’
u
^
t
+
h
)
T
P_{b,u}=\sum_{i=0}^{2m}W_{c}^{i}.(\chi_{i}-\hat{b}_{t+h})(z_{i}-\hat{u}_{t+h})^{T}
S
u
S_{u}
is the covariance of the transformed observations, computed as:
S
u
=
ОЈ
^
U
,
h
+
вҲ‘
i
=
0
2
вҖӢ
m
W
c
i
.
(
z
i
вҲ’
u
t
+
h
вҲ’
)
вҖӢ
(
z
i
вҲ’
u
t
+
h
вҲ’
)
T
S_{u}=\hat{\Sigma}_{U,h}+\sum_{i=0}^{2m}W_{c}^{i}.(z_{i}-u^{-}_{t+h})(z_{i}-u^{-}_{t+h})^{T}
Computing the reconciled distribution
After obtaining the Kalman Gain, we update the mean and covariance of the state estimate based on the observed data. The reconciled free-level posterior distribution
p
вҖӢ
(
B
t
+
h
|
U
t
+
h
=
u
^
t
+
h
)
p(B_{t+h}|U_{t+h}=\hat{u}_{t+h})
is updated as a Gaussian with the posterior mean
b
~
t
+
h
\tilde{b}_{t+h}
and posterior covariance
ОЈ
~
B
,
h
\tilde{\Sigma}_{B,h}
computed as:
b
~
t
+
h
\displaystyle\tilde{b}_{t+h}
=
b
^
t
+
h
+
K
вҖӢ
(
u
^
t
+
h
вҲ’
u
t
+
h
вҲ’
)
\displaystyle=\hat{b}_{t+h}+K(\hat{u}_{t+h}-u^{-}_{t+h})
(15)
ОЈ
~
B
,
h
\displaystyle\tilde{\Sigma}_{B,h}
=
ОЈ
^
B
,
h
вҲ’
K
вҖӢ
S
u
вҖӢ
K
T
\displaystyle=\hat{\Sigma}_{B,h}-KS_{u}K^{T}
(16)
Appendix B
Derivation of the reconciled distribution via conditioning
Let
рқҗҳ
^
=
[
рқҗ”
^
вҖІ
,
рқҗҒ
^
вҖІ
]
вҖІ
\widehat{\mathbf{Y}}=\left[\widehat{\mathbf{U}}^{\prime},\,\widehat{\mathbf{B}}^{\prime}\right]^{\prime}
be a random vector distributed as the base forecast distribution
ОҪ
^
\widehat{\nu}
.
We specify the reconciled distribution
ОҪ
~
B
\widetilde{\nu}_{B}
of the free time series as the distribution of
рқҗҒ
~
вҲј
рқҗҒ
^
|
(
рқҗ”
^
вҲ’
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗҒ
^
)
=
рқҹҺ
)
.
\widetilde{\mathbf{B}}\;\>\sim\;\;\widehat{\mathbf{B}}\;\Big|\left(\widehat{\mathbf{U}}-f_{u}(\widehat{\mathbf{B}})=\mathbf{0}\right).
(17)
Let
ОҪ
^
вҲҲ
в„ұ
в„қ
n
\widehat{\nu}\in\mathcal{F}_{\mathbb{R}^{n}}
be the base forecast distribution;
we assume that
ОҪ
^
\widehat{\nu}
is absolutely continuous, and we denote by
ПҖ
^
\widehat{\pi}
its density.
Following
Zambon
et al.
(
2023
)
, we define
рқҗҷ
=
рқҗ”
^
вҲ’
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗҒ
^
)
\mathbf{Z}=\hat{\mathbf{U}}-f_{u}(\hat{\mathbf{B}})
. The joint density function of
(
рқҗҷ
,
рқҗҒ
^
)
(\mathbf{Z},\hat{\mathbf{B}})
can be computed as:
ПҖ
(
рқҗҷ
,
рқҗҒ
^
)
вҖӢ
(
рқҗі
,
рқҗӣ
)
=
ПҖ
^
вҖӢ
(
рқҗі
+
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗӣ
)
,
рқҗӣ
)
\pi_{(\mathbf{Z},\hat{\mathbf{B}})}(\mathbf{z},\mathbf{b})=\hat{\pi}(\mathbf{z}+f_{u}(\mathbf{b}),\mathbf{b})
and the conditional density of
рқҗҒ
^
|
рқҗҷ
=
рқҹҺ
\widehat{\mathbf{B}}\;|\;\mathbf{Z}=\mathbf{0}
is the density of the reconciled forecast distribution of the free series:
ПҖ
~
B
вҖӢ
(
рқҗӣ
)
\displaystyle\widetilde{\pi}_{B}(\mathbf{b})
=
ПҖ
(
рқҗҷ
,
рқҗҒ
^
)
вҖӢ
(
рқҹҺ
,
рқҗӣ
)
вҲ«
ПҖ
(
рқҗҷ
,
рқҗҒ
^
)
вҖӢ
(
рқҹҺ
,
рқҗұ
)
вҖӢ
рқ‘‘
рқҗұ
\displaystyle=\frac{\pi_{(\mathbf{Z},\widehat{\mathbf{B}})}(\mathbf{0},\mathbf{b})}{\int\pi_{(\mathbf{Z},\widehat{\mathbf{B}})}(\mathbf{0},\mathbf{x})\,d\mathbf{x}}
=
ПҖ
^
вҖӢ
(
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗӣ
)
,
рқҗӣ
)
вҲ«
ПҖ
^
вҖӢ
(
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗұ
)
,
рқҗұ
)
вҖӢ
рқ‘‘
рқҗұ
\displaystyle=\frac{\hat{\pi}(f_{u}(\mathbf{b}),\mathbf{b})}{\int\hat{\pi}(f_{u}(\mathbf{x}),\mathbf{x})\,d\mathbf{x}}
вҲқ
ПҖ
^
вҖӢ
(
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗӣ
)
,
рқҗӣ
)
.
\displaystyle\propto\hat{\pi}(f_{u}(\mathbf{b}),\mathbf{b}).
Appendix C
UKF as reconciliation via conditioning
The LHS of Eq.В (
7
) is the conditional density of
рқҗҒ
^
|
рқҗҷ
=
0
\hat{\mathbf{B}}|\mathbf{Z}=\textbf{0}
, where
рқҗҷ
\mathbf{Z}
is defined in the same way as in
B
. This can be written as
p
вҖӢ
[
рқҗҒ
^
|
рқҗҷ
=
0
]
=
p
вҖӢ
[
рқҗҒ
^
|
рқҗ”
^
вҲ’
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗҒ
^
)
=
0
]
\displaystyle p[\hat{\mathbf{B}}|\mathbf{Z}=\textbf{0}]=p[\hat{\mathbf{B}}|\hat{\mathbf{U}}-f_{u}(\hat{\mathbf{B}})=\textbf{0}]
with change of variables.
вҹ№
p
вҖӢ
[
рқҗҒ
^
|
рқҗҷ
=
0
]
=
p
вҖӢ
[
рқҗҒ
^
|
рқҗ”
^
=
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗҒ
^
)
]
\implies p[\hat{\mathbf{B}}|\mathbf{Z}=\textbf{0}]=p[\hat{\mathbf{B}}|\hat{\mathbf{U}}=f_{u}(\hat{\mathbf{B}})]
(18)
UKF approximates the RHS of Eq.В (
18
) with the Gaussian distribution and has an additional Gaussian assumption on the free time series. So, UKF is a Gaussian approximation to the original definition of reconciliation via conditioning, with
p
вҖӢ
[
рқҗҒ
^
|
рқҗ”
^
=
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗҒ
^
)
]
p[\hat{\mathbf{B}}|\hat{\mathbf{U}}=f_{u}(\hat{\mathbf{B}})]
being approximated by
p
вҖӢ
[
рқҗҒ
^
|
рқҗ”
^
=
f
u
вҖӢ
(
рқҗҒ
^
)
+
Оө
u
]
p[\hat{\mathbf{B}}|\hat{\mathbf{U}}=f_{u}(\hat{\mathbf{B}})+\varepsilon^{u}]
.
Appendix D
Results
Method
Cantonal IR
Cantonal CR
Baseline
Base
1
1
PBU
0.839
0.973
Projection
OLS
1.088
1.267
WLS
0.837
0.96
Block
0.837
0.96
FULL
0.834
0.949
Conditioning
UKF
0.808
0.94
Table 9
:
GM results
References
G. Athanasopoulos, R. A. Ahmed, and R. J. Hyndman (2009)
Hierarchical forecasts for australian domestic tourism
.
International Journal of Forecasting
25
(
1
),
pp.В 146вҖ“166
.
External Links:
ISSN 0169-2070
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1
.
G. Athanasopoulos, R. J. Hyndman, N. Kourentzes, and A. Panagiotelis (2024)
Forecast reconciliation: a review
.
40
(
2
),
pp.В 430вҖ“456
.
External Links:
ISSN 0169-2070
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§4.1
.
G. Corani, D. Azzimonti, J. P. S. C. Augusto, and M. Zaffalon (2021)
Probabilistic reconciliation ofДғhierarchical forecast via bayesвҖҷ rule
.
In
Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases
,
F. Hutter, K. Kersting, J. Lijffijt, and I. Valera (Eds.)
,
Cham
,
pp.В 211вҖ“226
.
External Links:
ISBN 978-3-030-67664-3
Cited by:
В§1
,
В§3.2
,
В§3
.
G. Corani, D. Azzimonti, and N. Rubattu (2024)
Probabilistic reconciliation of count time series
.
International Journal of Forecasting
40
(
2
),
pp.В 457вҖ“469
.
External Links:
ISSN 0169-2070
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1
,
В§3.3
.
D. Girolimetto, G. Athanasopoulos, T. Di Fonzo, and R. J. Hyndman (2024)
Cross-temporal probabilistic forecast reconciliation: methodological and practical issues
.
40
(
3
),
pp.В 1134вҖ“1151
.
External Links:
ISSN 0169-2070
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§4
.
D. Girolimetto, A. Panagiotelis, T. D. Fonzo, and H. Li (2025)
Forecast reconciliation with non-linear constraints
.
External Links:
2510.21249
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1
,
В§3.1
,
В§4
,
В§4.2
,
В§5
.
T. Gneiting and A. E. Raftery (2007)
Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation
.
102
(
477
),
pp.В 359вҖ“378
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§4
,
В§4
.
R. Hyndman, G. Athanasopoulos, M. OвҖҷHara-Wild, N. Palihawadana, and S. Wickramasuriya (2026)
Fpp3: data for "forecasting: principles and practice" (3rd edition)
.
Note:
R package version 1.0.3
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§4.2
.
R. J. Hyndman, R. A. Ahmed, G. Athanasopoulos, and H. L. Shang (2011)
Optimal combination forecasts for hierarchical time series
.
Computational statistics & data analysis
55
(
9
),
pp.В 2579вҖ“2589
.
Cited by:
В§1
.
R. J. Hyndman and Y. Khandakar (2008)
Automatic time series forecasting: the forecast package for R
.
27
(
3
),
pp.В 1вҖ“22
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§4.2
.
S. J. Julier and J. K. Uhlmann (1997)
A new extension of the kalman filter to nonlinear systems
.
In
Proceedings of the 11th International Symposium on Aerospace/Defense Sensing, Simulation and Controls (AeroSense)
,
pp.В 182вҖ“193
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§3.2
.
S. J. Julier and J. K. Uhlmann (2004)
Unscented filtering and nonlinear estimation
.
92
(
3
),
pp.В 401вҖ“422
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§1
,
В§3.2
,
В§3.2
,
В§3.2
.
R. Jr. Labbe (2020)
Kalman and Bayesian Filters in Python
.
Note:
Online book
External Links:
Link
Cited by:
В§3.2
.
L. Nespoli, A. Biswas, R. Rocchetta, and V. Medici (2026)
Nonlinear reconciliation: error reduction theorems
.
Note:
External Links:
ISSN 2835-8856
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1
,
В§3.1
,
В§3.1
,
В§4.2
,
В§5
,
В§5
.
M. OвҖҷHara-Wild, R. Hyndman, E. Wang, and R. Godahewa (2022)
Tsibbledata: diverse datasets for вҖҷtsibbleвҖҷ
.
Note:
R package version 0.4.1
External Links:
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
В§4.3
.
A. Panagiotelis, G. Athanasopoulos, P. Gamakumara, and R. J. Hyndman (2021)
Forecast reconciliation: a geometric view with new insights on bias correction
.
International Journal of Forecasting
37
(
1
),
pp.В 343вҖ“359
.
External Links:
ISSN 0169-2070
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1
.
A. Panagiotelis, P. Gamakumara, G. Athanasopoulos, and R. J. Hyndman (2023)
Probabilistic forecast reconciliation: properties, evaluation and score optimisation
.
European Journal of Operational Research
306
(
2
),
pp.В 693вҖ“706
.
External Links:
ISSN 0377-2217
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1
,
В§2
,
В§2
,
В§3.1
,
В§3.1
,
В§3
,
В§4.1
.
S. B. Taieb, J. W. Taylor, and R. J. Hyndman (2021)
Hierarchical probabilistic forecasting of electricity demand with smart meter data
.
116
(
533
),
pp.В 27вҖ“43
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
,
https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.2020.1736081
Cited by:
В§1
.
R. J. van der Linde and R. R. Labbe (2019)
Kalman and bayesian filters in python
.
Note:
https://github.com/rlabbe/Kalman-and-Bayesian-Filters-in-Python
GitHub repository
Cited by:
В§3.2
,
В§3.2
.
S. L. Wickramasuriya, G. Athanasopoulos, and R. J. Hyndman (2019)
Optimal forecast reconciliation for hierarchical and grouped time series through trace minimization
.
Journal of the American Statistical Association
114
(
526
),
pp.В 804вҖ“819
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§1
,
itemВ 3
,
В§3.2
,
В§4.1
.
S. L. Wickramasuriya (2024)
Probabilistic forecast reconciliation under the gaussian framework
.
42
(
1
),
pp.В 272вҖ“285
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
,
https://doi.org/10.1080/07350015.2023.2181176
Cited by:
В§1
,
itemВ 3
.
L. Zambon, A. Agosto, P. Giudici, and G. Corani (2024a)
Properties of the reconciled distributions for gaussian and count forecasts
.
40
(
4
),
pp.В 1438вҖ“1448
.
External Links:
ISSN 0169-2070
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§1
.
L. Zambon, D. Azzimonti, and G. Corani (2023)
Efficient probabilistic reconciliation of forecasts for real-valued and count time series
.
34
(
21
).
Note:
Article number: 21
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Appendix B
,
В§1
,
В§2
,
В§3.2
,
В§3.3
,
В§3
.
L. Zambon, D. Azzimonti, N. Rubattu, and G. Corani (2024b)
Probabilistic reconciliation of mixed-type hierarchical time series
.
In
Proceedings of the Fortieth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence
,
N. Kiyavash and J. M. Mooij (Eds.)
,
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research
, Vol.
244
,
pp.В 4078вҖ“4095
.
External Links:
Link
Cited by:
В§1
,
В§3.3
.
B. Zhang, A. Panagiotelis, and Y. Kang (2024)
Discrete forecast reconciliation
.
318
(
1
),
pp.В 143вҖ“153
.
External Links:
ISSN 0377-2217
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§3.3
.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA