Predicted number counts and clustering of Hi galaxies from future radio surveys
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
2
Telescope and Survey Specification
3
Hi
Galaxy Simulations
3.1
Hi
Galaxy Observables from IllustrisTNG
3.1.1
TNG100
3.1.2
TNG300
3.2
Comparing the number density and bias from simulations
4
Fisher forecasts for cosmology
5
Angular Correlation Function and Halo Occupation Distribution
5.1
Angular correlation function and its covariance
5.2
Bayesian parameter inference for the HOD model
5.3
Parameter inference results
6
Conclusions
References
A
Correlation matrices for IllustrisTNG sub-fields
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2604.26886v1 [astro-ph.CO] 29 Apr 2026
Predicted number counts and clustering of
Hi
galaxies from future
radio surveys
Ainulnabilah Nasirudin
1
,
Philip Bull
1,2
,
and Isabelle Ye
1
1
Jodrell Bank Centre for Astrophysics, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, United Kingdom
2
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Western Cape, Cape Town 7535, South Africa
E-mail: ainulnabilah.nasirudin@manchester.ac.uk
(Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ)
Abstract
The 21cm emission line from neutral hydrogen (
Hi
) contained within galaxies provides a way to make accurate spectroscopic redshift determinations in the radio part of the spectrum. Large radio arrays such as SKA-MID are coming online that will have the sensitivity and survey time required to catalogue hundreds of thousands to millions of
Hi
galaxies, opening up the possibility of studying the cosmological large scale structure using this technique. The expected number counts and clustering properties of the galaxies are still quite poorly understood however. We use three different simulated galaxy catalogues to predict the properties of the
Hi
galaxy distribution that SKA-MID will be able to observe, along with estimates of the error on these predictions due to modelling uncertainty. The simulations in question are from S
3
-SAX (semi-analytic models based on the Millennium dark matter-only simulation); GAEA (an updated semi-analytic model partially calibrated on hydrodynamical simulations); and IllustrisTNG (a hydrodynamical simulation). We present predictions for galaxy number counts as a function of sensitivity cut and redshift, and use these to forecast the cosmological performance of a proposed SKA-MID cosmological survey. Finally, we fit a halo occupation distribution model to low-redshift angular correlation functions to constrain clustering properties of multiple sub-volumes of the simulations to gain insight into the expected variation (sample variance) over smaller survey areas.
keywords:
galaxies: haloes – cosmology: cosmological parameters – cosmology: large-scale structure of Universe
†
†
pubyear:
2026
†
†
pagerange:
Predicted number counts and clustering of
Hi
galaxies from future
radio surveys
–
A
1
Introduction
Galaxies form within the cosmic web, and as a result they (imperfectly) trace the spatial distribution of the dominant dark matter component. The relationship between observable galaxies and the underlying dark matter is typically described using halo models, in which statistical relationships are defined between particular types of galaxy and generic dark matter haloes characterised by their mass
(Jing
et al.
,
1998
; Peacock and Smith,
2000
; Cooray and Sheth,
2002
; Berlind and Weinberg,
2002
; Guo
et al.
,
2016
; Bull,
2017
; Asgari
et al.
,
2023
)
. These relationships have free parameters that are then calibrated using observations or simulations.
On large scales, halo models can be used to model and predict the linear bias, which quantifies the relative strength of clustering of the galaxies with respect to the dark matter field. On small scales, the clustering models become more complex, and must statistically describe the spatial distribution of galaxies within individual haloes. These two regimes – large scales, and sub-halo scales – are described by the 2-halo and 1-halo terms respectively. A common approach is to use a ‘Halo Occupation Distribution’ (HOD) to model these terms
(Berlind and Weinberg,
2002
)
. This specifies the mean number of galaxies – possibly divided into central and satellite populations
(Zheng
et al.
,
2005
)
– as a function of the mass of the host halo. Alternative approaches, such as Sub-Halo Abundance Matching (SHAM)
(Kravtsov
et al.
,
2004
; Conroy
et al.
,
2006
; Guo
et al.
,
2016
)
, are also available.
The HOD parameters can be inferred observationally by fitting to two-point functions of the galaxy number count distribution, i.e. quantities that describe the covariance of the galaxy density field as a function of separation or distance scale. A variety of two-point functions can be formed depending on the available information about galaxy positions
(for a summary, see Chisari
et al.
,
2019
)
; for instance, if the 3D positions of galaxies are accurately known through spectroscopic redshift measurements, the correlation function
ξ
​
(
r
→
)
\xi(\vec{r})
(in configuration space) or power spectrum
P
​
(
k
→
)
P(\vec{k})
(in Fourier space) can be measured. For galaxies with less precise radial positions (e.g. photometric redshift estimates), it is more common to measure the angular correlation function
w
​
(
θ
→
)
w(\vec{\theta})
(in angular separation) or the angular power spectrum
C
ℓ
C_{\ell}
. Cross-spectra between pairs of redshift bins may also be formed. All of these quantities can be predicted through appropriate projections of the galaxy power spectrum, which can in turn be calculated by applying the HOD model to the dark matter power spectrum
(Chisari
et al.
,
2019
)
.
At optical and near-infrared wavelengths, large galaxy catalogues have been constructed and used to make high signal-to-noise measurements of two-point functions, permitting HOD parameters to be inferred for various galaxy populations at a range of redshifts
(e.g. Avila
et al.
,
2020
; Yuan
et al.
,
2024
; Salcedo
et al.
,
2025
)
. The HOD parameters that are recovered depend on the properties of the galaxy samples, such as their depth, colour selections, and/or photometric redshift binning, but can be used to gain insight into the physical clustering properties of the galaxies and the masses of the dark matter haloes that they are embedded in.
The clustering properties of radio galaxy populations are typically less well constrained, although clustering measurements have been made for a number of different galaxy samples, ranging from continuum galaxies and AGN hosts, to
Hi
galaxies
(e.g. Peacock and Nicholson,
1991
; Loan
et al.
,
1997
; Cress
et al.
,
1996
; Blake
et al.
,
2004
; Negrello
et al.
,
2006
; Mandelbaum
et al.
,
2009
; Nusser and Tiwari,
2015
; Obuljen
et al.
,
2019
; Alonso
et al.
,
2021
; Nakoneczny
et al.
,
2024
; Hale
et al.
,
2024
; Hamlett
et al.
,
2026
)
. Part of the problem is the difficulty of obtaining precise redshifts for large samples of radio galaxies. Those detected through continuum (i.e. synchrotron and free-free) emission lack well-defined spectral features that could be used to estimate redshifts and so must be cross-matched with other redshift tracers
(e.g. Jackson and Wall,
1998
; Harrison
et al.
,
2017
)
. Only a handful of emission/absorption lines are readily observable at GHz frequencies and below, and these tend to be relatively faint. The most notable radio emission line for the purposes of this work is the 21cm line from neutral hydrogen (H
I
). Neutral hydrogen is ubiquitous in galaxies, tending to exist in dense self-shielded regions where it is not easily ionised by background UV photons. The line itself tends to be rather faint however, and so the only large samples of
Hi
galaxies to date are at very low redshifts – the ALFALFA catalogue of 31,500 sources extends to
z
≲
0.06
z\lesssim 0.06
for example
(Haynes
et al.
,
2018
)
.
We are now entering an era of rapid growth in the sensitivity of radio arrays, and hence the size and depth of the galaxy surveys that they can perform
(Giovanelli and Haynes,
2015
; Staveley-Smith and Oosterloo,
2015
)
. For the purposes of survey planning and theoretical modelling, it is useful to be able to predict the expected number density of galaxies as a function of redshift and flux density, and the corresponding clustering properties of the sample
(e.g. Santos
et al.
,
2015
; Padmanabhan
et al.
,
2017
; Villaescusa-Navarro
et al.
,
2018
)
. These quantities are quite uncertain for
Hi
galaxies however, and so the clearest predictions for fainter and higher-redshift samples tend to come from simulations. These are subject to substantial model uncertainties, as we will discuss further below.
In this paper, we make updated predictions for the
Hi
galaxy number counts that will be achievable with current and near-future radio arrays, including ASKAP, MeerKAT, and SKA-MID
(Maddox
et al.
,
2021
; Rhee
et al.
,
2023
; Kazemi-Moridani
et al.
,
2025
)
. These arrays are capable of measuring substantial numbers of
Hi
galaxies out to
z
≳
1
z\gtrsim 1
depending on the survey strategy, and can also catalogue large numbers of
Hi
galaxies over thousands of square degrees at much lower redshifts,
z
≲
0.3
z\lesssim 0.3
(Square Kilometre Array Cosmology Science Working Group
et al.
,
2020
)
. As such, the
Hi
galaxy population predictions must reach flux densities of order
μ
\mu
Jy, and redshifts beyond unity. Our approach is to compare the
Hi
galaxy populations in three simulated datasets – the original S
3
-SAX semi-analytic catalogue based on the Millennium dark matter-only simulation
(Obreschkow
et al.
,
2009
; Yahya
et al.
,
2015
; Bull,
2016
)
; an updated semi-analytic simulation called GAEA, which is partly calibrated using hydrodynamical simulations
(Zoldan
et al.
,
2017
)
; and the IllustrisTNG hydrodynamical simulation
(Nelson
et al.
,
2018
; Stevens
et al.
,
2019
)
. While hardly exhaustive, this gives a handle on the level of theoretical uncertainty that exists when simulating this kind of galaxy in a cosmological context. To help put these numbers in context, we use the S
3
-SAX and GAEA predictions to forecast the uncertainties on cosmological distance measurements (the expansion rate and angular diameter distance) as a function of redshift for the planned SKA-MID configurations.
We then take a high-resolution
z
≈
0
z\approx 0
snapshot of IllustrisTNG and use it to predict the clustering properties of the
Hi
galaxies at the low redshifts where wide-area surveys will be possible. Rather than working directly on the simulated matter distribution, we compute the angular correlation function from a mock catalogue of
Hi
galaxies with a simple flux density threshold selection. We then use a Bayesian parameter inference approach to fit the HOD model parameters to the simulated observations
(Ye
et al.
,
2025
)
. By dividing the snapshot into nine sub-regions, each of size
20
∘
×
20
∘
20^{\circ}\times 20^{\circ}
and redshift range
0.01
≤
z
≤
0.067
0.01\leq z\leq 0.067
, we are also able to study sample variance effects from the finite volume being probed.
This paper is arranged as follows. Section
2
shows the calculation of the expected sensitivity of the SKA-MID instrument with different array configurations. In Section
3
, we provide details about the
Hi
simulations we use and the post-processing steps involved. Next, in Section
4
, we discuss the cosmological constraints from Fisher matrix forecasts run with the
Hi
observables. We then present the effect of sample variance on the angular correlation function and HOD model in Section
5
before concluding in Section
6
.
Configuration
Band [MHz]
A
eff
/
T
sys
A_{\rm eff}/T_{\rm sys}
[m
2
/K]
Beam FoV [deg
2
]
t
p
t_{p}
[hr]
Flux dens. rms [
μ
\mu
Jy]
AA*
350 - 1050
733.2
1.78
3.55
235.2
950 - 1760
1201.4
0.47
0.95
277.8
AA4
350 - 1050
1029
1.78
3.55
167.6
950 - 1760
1733
0.47
0.95
192.6
Table 1:
Survey specifications for a total observation time of 10,000 hours and survey area of 5,000 deg
2
. The values for
A
eff
/
T
sys
A_{\rm eff}/T_{\rm sys}
, primary beam field of view, time per pointing
t
p
t_{p}
, and flux density rms (per beam) are given at the central frequency of the band.
2
Telescope and Survey Specification
In this section, we calculate the expected sensitivity for detecting the 21cm line from individual galaxies based on the SKA-MID receiver and array specifications. See
Yahya
et al.
(
2015
)
for further details.
The root mean square (rms) flux density measured by a radio interferometer in the limit of a large number of dishes is given by
S
rms
≃
2
​
k
B
​
T
sys
A
eff
​
2
​
δ
​
ν
​
t
p
​
Jy/beam
.
S_{\rm rms}\simeq\frac{2k_{\rm B}T_{\rm sys}}{A_{\rm eff}\sqrt{2\,\delta\nu\,t_{p}}}\,\textrm{Jy/beam}.
(1)
Here,
k
B
k_{\rm B}
is the Boltzmann constant,
T
sys
T_{\rm sys}
is the system temperature,
A
eff
A_{\rm eff}
is the total effective collecting area,
δ
​
ν
\delta\nu
is the width of the frequency channel, and
t
p
t_{p}
is the observation time per pointing. Assuming reasonable values associated with modern arrays, the equation can be re-written as
S
rms
=
260
​
μ
​
Jy
/
bm
​
(
T
sys
20
​
K
)
​
(
25
,
000
​
m
2
A
eff
)
​
(
10
​
kHz
δ
​
ν
)
1
/
2
​
(
1
​
hr
t
p
)
1
/
2
.
S_{\rm rms}=260\,\mu\textrm{Jy}/\textrm{bm}\left(\frac{T_{\rm sys}}{20\textrm{\, K}}\right)\left(\frac{25,000\textrm{\,m}^{2}}{A_{\rm eff}}\right)\left(\frac{10\,\textrm{kHz}}{\delta\nu}\right)^{1/2}\left(\frac{1\textrm{hr}}{t_{p}}\right)^{1/2}.
(2)
If the total useful observing time for a survey,
t
tot
t_{\rm tot}
, is divided uniformly across a survey area
S
area
S_{\rm area}
,
t
p
t_{p}
can be calculated as
t
p
≈
t
tot
S
area
​
[
π
8
​
(
1.3
​
λ
D
)
2
]
.
t_{p}\approx\frac{t_{\rm tot}}{S_{\rm area}}\left[\frac{\pi}{8}\left(\frac{1.3\lambda}{D}\right)^{2}\right].
(3)
Here,
λ
\lambda
is the wavelength, and
D
dish
D_{\rm dish}
is the dish diameter, where the value in the square bracket is the area per pointing equal to the area of the primary beam as a function of wavelength. With SKA-MID, for a 5,000 deg
2
survey over 10,000 hours
(Square Kilometre Array Cosmology Science Working Group
et al.
,
2020
)
,
t
p
t_{p}
corresponds to 3.55 and 0.95 hours at the central frequency of Band 1 (350 – 1050 MHz) and Band 2 (950 – 1760 MHz) respectively.
We use values of
A
eff
/
T
sys
A_{\rm eff}/T_{\rm sys}
from the anticipated SKA1 science performance memo
1
1
1
https://www.skao.int/sites/default/files/documents/SKAO-TEL-0000818-V2_SKA1_Science_Performance.pdf
to calculate the flux density rms using Equation
2
for SKA1-MID AA* and AA4 configurations
2
2
2
The AA* configuration consists of 144 dishes with a maximum baseline of 108.0 km, while the AA4 configuration consists of of all 197 dishes with a maximum baseline of 159.6 km.
for one hour per pointing. A summary of the resulting survey specifications is given in Table
1
.
3
Hi
Galaxy Simulations
In this section, we outline the conversion steps used on the IllustrisTNG simulation output to get to the observable quantities, along with calculations of the
Hi
galaxy number density and bias from all three simulations.
The following selection cuts have been applied to all simulations, following
Yahya
et al.
(
2015
)
:
•
Observed
Hi
line width
W
θ
>
2
​
δ
​
V
W_{\theta}>2\delta V
;
•
Total
Hi
flux density
S
>
N
cut
×
S
rms
/
W
θ
/
δ
​
V
S>N_{\rm cut}\times S_{\rm rms}/\sqrt{W_{\theta}/\delta V}
,
where
N
cut
=
5
N_{\rm cut}=5
, and the frequency resolution is taken to be 10 kHz, corresponding to a velocity width of
δ
​
V
=
2.1
​
(
1
+
z
)
\delta V=2.1(1+z)
km s
-1
. This corresponds to a relatively optimistic
5
​
σ
5\sigma
threshold for source detection, but a more conservative cut on line widths that excludes (mostly face-on) galaxies that do not have the characteristic broad double-horned line profile
(Obreschkow
et al.
,
2009
)
.
3.1
Hi
Galaxy Observables from IllustrisTNG
IllustrisTNG
3
3
3
https://www.tng-project.org/
is a suite of state-of-the-art cosmological magnetohydrodynamical simulations of galaxy formation and evolution
(Nelson
et al.
,
2018
; Pillepich
et al.
,
2018
; Springel
et al.
,
2018
; Naiman
et al.
,
2018
; Marinacci
et al.
,
2018
; Nelson
et al.
,
2019
)
. There are three physical box sizes that probe different astrophysical processes: 35, 75, and 205 Mpc/
h
h
, commonly referred to as TNG50, TNG100, and TNG300 respectively. For this work, we use the supplementary data post-processed from the original catalogue, which provide the
Hi
and H
2
content of the galaxies at snapshot redshifts
z
=
[
0
,
0.5
,
1.0
,
1.5
,
2.0
]
z=[0,0.5,1.0,1.5,2.0]
(Diemer
et al.
,
2019
)
.
Figure 1:
Distribution of
Hi
galaxies in 20
∘
chunks of the TNG300 simulation box, for galaxies between
0.01
≤
z
≤
0.067
0.01\leq z\leq 0.067
. The galaxies are colour-coded according to their observed flux density for an observer at a fixed reference position in the simulation box. The total number of galaxies with flux density above
100
​
μ
100\ \mu
Jy is stated at the top of each panel.
Figure 2:
The mean halo mass (left) and cumulative number of galaxies above a flux density threshold,
N
​
(
S
>
S
rms
)
N(S>S_{\rm rms})
, (right) as a function of flux density cut for the nine different fields. The dash-dotted lines are the values for each field, while the solid line represents the mean across all nine fields.
Figure 3:
The number of galaxies as a function of halo mass and flux density threshold for one of the nine fields. At
S
rms
=
800
​
μ
S_{\rm rms}=800\,\mu
Jy, there is notable gap in the number of high-mass haloes.
We convert the atomic
Hi
mass,
M
Hi
M_{\rm\textsc{Hi}}
, to the intrinsic
Hi
line width,
W
e
W_{\rm e}
, following the relationship
W
e
420
​
km s
−
1
=
(
M
Hi
10
10
​
M
⊙
)
0.3
\frac{W_{\rm e}}{420\textrm{\, km s}^{-1}}=\left(\frac{M_{\rm\textsc{Hi}}}{10^{10}\textrm{\, M}_{\odot}}\right)^{0.3}
(4)
from
Duffy
et al.
(
2012
)
. Because details on the projected inclination of these galaxies are not included in the TNG catalogue, we use the same method as
Duffy
et al.
(
2012
)
whereby a value of inclination angle
θ
\theta
is assigned to each
Hi
galaxy following
cos
⁡
θ
∼
U
​
(
0
,
1
)
\cos\theta\sim{\rm U}(0,1)
.
The line width of an inclined galaxy,
W
θ
W_{\theta}
, can then be calculated as
(
W
e
​
sin
⁡
θ
)
2
=
W
θ
2
+
V
o
2
−
2
​
W
θ
​
V
o
​
[
1
−
e
−
(
W
θ
V
c
)
2
]
−
2
​
V
o
2
​
e
−
(
W
θ
V
c
)
2
,
(W_{\rm e}\sin\theta)^{2}=W_{\theta}^{2}+V_{\rm o}^{2}-2W_{\theta}V_{\rm o}\left[1-e^{-\left(\frac{W_{\theta}}{V_{\rm c}}\right)^{2}}\right]-2V_{\rm o}^{2}e^{-\left(\frac{W_{\theta}}{V_{\rm c}}\right)^{2}},
(5)
where
V
c
=
120
V_{\rm c}=120
km s
-1
marks a transition between the Gaussian vs ‘boxy’ line profiles seen in small vs large galaxies respectively; and
V
o
≈
20
V_{\rm o}\approx 20
km s
-1
is a contribution from random motions within the disc
(Tully and Fouque,
1985
; Duffy
et al.
,
2012
)
.
If we assume that the
Hi
galaxies are optically thin, the observed-frame, velocity-integrated flux
S
V
obs
S^{V_{\rm obs}}
is then related to
M
Hi
M_{\rm\textsc{Hi}}
by
M
Hi
≃
2.35
×
10
5
​
h
−
2
​
M
⊙
(
1
+
z
)
2
​
(
D
L
h
−
1
​
Mpc
)
2
​
(
S
V
obs
Jy
​
km
​
s
−
1
)
,
M_{\rm\textsc{Hi}}\simeq\frac{2.35\times 10^{5}\,h^{-2}{\rm M}_{\odot}}{(1+z)^{2}}\left(\frac{D_{L}}{h^{-1}\rm{\,Mpc}}\right)^{2}\left(\frac{S^{V_{\rm obs}}}{\rm{Jy\,km\,s}^{-1}}\right),
(6)
where
h
h
is the dimensionless Hubble constant and
D
L
D_{L}
is the luminosity distance
(Meyer
et al.
,
2017
)
. We can then divide
S
V
obs
S^{V_{\rm obs}}
by
W
θ
W_{\theta}
to get flux density
S
S
.
We use two different treatments to calculate the distribution of
Hi
galaxies from the TNG100 and TNG300 simulations, according to what they will be used for.
3.1.1
TNG100
The higher resolution data from TNG100 are used to calculate the
Hi
galaxy number density,
d
​
N
/
d
​
z
dN/dz
, and bias,
b
​
(
z
)
b(z)
, which are the two important ingredients needed to predict cosmological observables from the detected
Hi
galaxies. This is because we expect low-mass haloes to host a considerable amount of
Hi
. Instead of constructing a lightcone, we have chosen to interpolate the values between the snapshots.
Specifically, we calculate
d
​
N
/
d
​
z
dN/dz
following these steps:
1.
Bin the data according to
z
z
,
M
Hi
M_{\rm\textsc{Hi}}
, and
W
θ
W_{\theta}
;
2.
Divide number count by simulation volume to find
d
​
N
/
d
​
V
​
(
z
)
dN/dV(z)
;
3.
Interpolate values of
d
​
N
/
d
​
V
​
(
z
)
dN/dV(z)
between
z
=
0.01
z=0.01
and
z
=
2
z=2
;
4.
Calculate
S
S
from
M
Hi
M_{\rm\textsc{Hi}}
and
W
θ
W_{\theta}
;
5.
Apply the two selection cuts;
6.
Sum the bins of
d
​
N
/
d
​
V
​
(
z
)
dN/dV(z)
and multiply by
d
​
V
d
​
z
​
d
​
Ω
\frac{dV}{dzd\Omega}
.
The latter quantity is given by
d
​
V
d
​
z
​
d
​
Ω
[Mpc
3
deg
−
2
per unit
z
]
=
c
​
r
​
(
z
)
2
H
​
(
z
)
(
π
180
)
2
,
\frac{dV}{dzd\Omega}\,\textrm{[Mpc}^{3}\textrm{deg}^{-2}\textrm{ per unit \,}z]=\frac{cr(z)^{2}}{H(z)}\left(\frac{\pi}{180}\right)^{2},
(7)
where
c
c
is the speed of light,
r
​
(
z
)
r(z)
is the comoving distance at
z
z
, and
H
​
(
z
)
H(z)
is the cosmic expansion rate.
Similarly, we follow the same steps outlined above to calculate the
Hi
galaxy bias, but with some adjustments:
1.
Bin the data according to
z
z
,
M
Hi
M_{\rm\textsc{Hi}}
,
W
θ
W_{\theta}
, and halo mass,
M
h
M_{h}
;
2.
Calculate the values of
S
S
using the values of
M
Hi
M_{\rm\textsc{Hi}}
and
W
θ
W_{\theta}
;
3.
Apply the two selection cuts;
4.
Calculate the
Hi
galaxy bias,
b
​
(
z
,
S
rms
)
b(z,S_{\rm rms})
.
The bias is given by
b
​
(
z
,
S
rms
)
≈
∑
i
b
​
(
z
,
M
h
i
)
​
N
​
(
M
h
i
)
N
tot
,
b(z,S_{\rm rms})\approx\sum_{i}b(z,M_{h}^{i})\frac{N(M_{h}^{i})}{N_{\rm tot}},
(8)
where
b
​
(
z
,
M
h
i
)
b(z,M_{h}^{i})
,
N
​
(
M
h
i
)
N(M_{h}^{i})
, and
N
tot
N_{\rm tot}
are the Sheth-Tormen halo bias for mass
M
h
i
M_{h}^{i}
(Sheth and Tormen,
1999
)
, the number of dark matter halo with mass
M
h
i
M_{h}^{i}
passing the selection cuts for a particular
S
rms
S_{\rm rms}
, and the total number of haloes passing the selection cuts respectively
(Yahya
et al.
,
2015
)
.
3.1.2
TNG300
We use the data from TNG300 to study the clustering of galaxies (see Section
5.1
) because of its larger volume. In this part of our work, we use the data at snapshot 0 and calculate the redshift of a galaxy based on its comoving position from a reference observer. We only include galaxies between
0.01
≤
z
≤
0.067
0.01\leq z\leq 0.067
with
S
≤
10
5
​
μ
S\leq 10^{5}\mu
Jy. The simulation box is divided into nine different fields, each with a square field of view of 20
∘
, as shown in Figure
1
.
We compare the mean halo mass and cumulative number of galaxies above the flux density threshold as a function of flux density cut from the nine fields in Figure
2
. The dash-dotted lines represent the values in each field while the solid red line represents the mean across all nine fields. The mean halo mass in each field ranges between 3.8 to 4.8
×
10
11
​
M
⊙
/
h
\times 10^{11}\,M_{\odot}/h
at
S
rms
=
100
​
μ
S_{\rm rms}=100~\mu
Jy. At
S
rms
=
1000
​
μ
S_{\rm rms}=1000~\mu
Jy, this goes up by only about
0.4
×
10
11
​
M
⊙
/
h
0.4\times 10^{11}\,M_{\odot}/h
, i.e. the mean halo mass changes only slowly with flux density at
z
=
0
z=0
. The cumulative number of galaxies more than doubles between 1000
μ
\mu
Jy and 100
μ
\mu
Jy however.
It is interesting to note that in some fields, the mean halo mass does not increase monotonically as a function of flux density threshold. For example, in one field, the mean halo mass drops drastically around
S
rms
=
800
​
μ
S_{\rm rms}=800\mu
Jy. To help understand why, we have included Figure
3
, showing the number of galaxies as a function of halo mass and flux density threshold for the same field. The sudden drop can be attributed to the lack of rarer high-mass haloes above
S
rms
=
800
​
μ
S_{\rm rms}=800\mu
Jy. In contrast, the cumulative number of galaxies decreases monotonically as the flux density threshold increases.
3.2
Comparing the number density and bias from simulations
S
rms
S_{\rm rms}
[
μ
\mu
Jy]
c
1
c_{1}
c
2
c_{2}
c
3
c_{3}
c
4
c_{4}
c
5
c_{5}
0
6.21
1.72
0.79
0.5874
9.3577
1
6.55
2.02
3.81
0.4968
0.7206
10
6.44
1.83
7.59
0.5928
0.8072
100
5.63
1.41
15.49
0.6052
1.0859
200
5.00
1.04
17.52
–
–
Table 2:
Fitting parameter values for
d
​
N
/
d
​
z
dN/dz
and
b
​
(
z
)
b(z)
based on the S
3
-SAX catalogue; taken from
Yahya
et al.
(
2015
)
.
S
rms
S_{\rm rms}
[
μ
\mu
Jy]
c
1
c_{1}
c
2
c_{2}
c
3
c_{3}
c
4
c_{4}
c
5
c_{5}
0
6.370
2.117
2.609
0.738
0.297
1
6.339
2.102
3.091
0.738
0.300
10
6.538
2.208
6.432
0.723
0.442
100
6.849
2.336
17.895
0.710
0.923
200
7.170
2.492
26.385
0.716
1.086
Table 3:
Fitting parameter values for
d
​
N
/
d
​
z
dN/dz
and
b
​
(
z
)
b(z)
based on the GAEA catalogue.
We compare
d
​
N
/
d
​
z
dN/dz
and
b
​
(
z
)
b(z)
values as a function of redshift and flux density cut from three different simulations: SKADS Simulated Skies Semi-Analytical eXtragalactic (S
3
-SAX),
4
4
4
http://s-cubed.physics.ox.ac.uk/s3_sax
GAEA, and IllustrisTNG. For the first two simulations,
d
​
N
/
d
​
z
dN/dz
and
b
​
(
z
)
b(z)
are calculated from the fitting formulae
d
​
N
d
​
z
=
10
c
1
​
z
c
2
​
exp
⁡
(
−
c
3
​
z
)
;
b
​
(
z
)
=
c
4
​
exp
⁡
(
c
5
​
z
)
,
\frac{dN}{dz}=10^{c_{1}}z^{c_{2}}\exp(-c_{3}z);~~~~~~~b(z)=c_{4}\exp(c_{5}z),
(9)
where
c
i
c_{i}
are free parameters that best-fit the simulation data. We provide the values of these parameters in Tables
2
and
3
. For further details on these simulations, including modelling choices for the
Hi
, see
De Lucia and Blaizot (
2007
); Obreschkow
et al.
(
2009
); Yahya
et al.
(
2015
)
for S
3
-SAX, and
De Lucia
et al.
(
2014
); Zoldan
et al.
(
2017
); Mayor
et al.
(
2026
)
for GAEA.
Figure 4:
(Top row):
The galaxy number density with different flux density cuts for the S
3
-SAX (solid), GAEA (dashed), and TNG100 (dash-dot)
Hi
simulations. The left panel is a zoom-in of the
z
≤
0.4
z\leq 0.4
range of the right panel. The colours denote the fixed flux rms thresholds according to the colourbar labels.
(Bottom row):
The
Hi
bias with different flux cuts for S
3
-SAX (solid), GAEA (dash), and TNG100 (dash dot)
Hi
simulation, along with the observed bias with
S
rms
=
2.4
S_{\rm rms}=2.4
mJy from the ALFALFA survey
(Obuljen
et al.
,
2019
)
.
We present the
Hi
galaxy number density and bias with different constant flux density cuts (represented by the various colours) for the S
3
-SAX (solid), GAEA (dashed), and TNG100 (dash-dot)
Hi
simulations in Figure
4
. For comparison, we have also added the
Hi
bias calculated from the ALFALFA survey at
z
≈
0.022
z\approx 0.022
(Obuljen
et al.
,
2019
)
.
Figure 5:
Forecast fractional errors on the expansion rate,
H
​
(
z
)
H(z)
, (left) and angular diameter distance,
d
A
​
(
z
)
d_{A}(z)
, (right) for the AA* and AA4 survey parameters, based on predicted number densities from S
3
-SAX and GAEA. The filled markers are for Band 2 and the unfilled ones are for Band 1.
At the
0
​
μ
0~\mu
Jy threshold, S
3
-SAX predicts the highest number density of
Hi
galaxies across all redshifts, as apparent in Figure
4
. Interestingly, the TNG100 results are comparable to S
3
-SAX, even though the latter is based on a Semi-Analytical Model (SAM) and the former is a hydrodynamical simulation. In contrast, GAEA differs from the S
3
-SAX results by a factor of 2–3 at low redshifts, and almost an order of magnitude at higher redshift, despite it being based on the same dark matter-only simulation, Millennium
(Springel
et al.
,
2005
)
, and using the direct successor of the original SAM
(De Lucia and Blaizot,
2007
)
used to generate the S
3
-SAX catalogue. We also note that the free parameters from S
3
-SAX used in the fitting function in Equation
9
result in an unwanted behaviour at low
z
z
in which the number density at
S
rms
>
100
​
μ
S_{\rm rms}>100\,\mu
Jy approaches the same values as
S
rms
=
0
​
μ
S_{\rm rms}=0\,\mu
Jy.
At higher flux density rms threshold values of
S
rms
>
50
​
μ
S_{\rm rms}>50\,\mu
Jy, the number densities are generally highest from TNG100 and lowest from S
3
-SAX, with results from GAEA being in between the two simulations. All three simulations have comparable peaks within roughly a factor of two at
z
∼
0.1
z\sim 0.1
, but at higher redshifts, the discrepancy can be as large as several orders of magnitude.
In contrast to the number density, the galaxy bias shown in Figure
4
has a wide range of values especially at higher flux density rms thresholds. In fact, the difference at
S
rms
>
100
​
μ
S_{\rm rms}>100\,\mu
Jy, can be up to a factor of 6 for the higher redshifts. It is worth noting that S
3
-SAX and GAEA show comparable values of the bias, while TNG100 consistently shows bias values of
∼
0.8
\sim 0.8
at
z
≲
0.4
z\lesssim 0.4
. This outcome may be caused by the smaller volume of
∼
(
100
\sim(100
Mpc
)
3
)^{3}
used by TNG100, making it harder to get a robust estimate of the bias. Hence, we have chosen to only run the cosmological forecasts using S
3
-SAX and GAEA in the next section. For comparison, the inferred bias from the ALFALFA survey is larger than the bias from all simulations, but has a significantly higher flux density threshold than we considered, at
S
rms
=
2.4
S_{\rm rms}=2.4
mJy.
4
Fisher forecasts for cosmology
In this section, we provide a short description of a mathematical formalism for performing Fisher matrix forecasts for galaxy surveys, and discuss the results of the forecast performed using inputs from the S
3
-SAX and GAEA simulations.
First, we briefly summarise the Fisher matrix formalism for predicting the (Gaussian) uncertainties on cosmological parameters derived from measurements of the galaxy power spectrum. Further detailed are provided in
Bull
et al.
(
2015
)
and references therein.
The total power spectrum at redshift
z
z
and wavevector
𝐤
=
(
𝐤
⟂
,
k
∥
)
\mathbf{k}=(\mathbf{k}_{\perp},k_{\parallel})
,
P
tot
​
(
z
,
𝐤
)
P_{\rm tot}(z,\mathbf{k})
, is defined as
P
tot
​
(
z
,
𝐤
)
=
(
b
​
(
z
)
+
f
​
μ
2
)
2
​
exp
⁡
(
−
k
2
​
μ
2
​
σ
NL
2
)
​
D
2
​
(
z
)
​
P
​
(
z
=
0
,
𝐤
)
,
P_{\rm tot}(z,\mathbf{k})=(b(z)+f\mu^{2})^{2}\exp(-k^{2}\mu^{2}\sigma^{2}_{\rm NL})D^{2}(z)P(z=0,\mathbf{k}),
(10)
where
f
f
is the dimensionless linear growth rate,
μ
≡
k
∥
/
k
\mu\equiv k_{\parallel}/k
,
D
D
is the linear growth factor, and
σ
NL
2
\sigma^{2}_{\rm NL}
is the non-linear dispersion
(Bull
et al.
,
2015
)
.
From this, the Fisher matrix of a galaxy redshift survey for parameters indexed by
(
i
,
j
)
(i,j)
can be written as
F
i
​
j
=
1
2
​
∫
k
min
k
max
d
3
​
k
(
2
​
π
)
3
​
[
∂
i
ln
​
P
tot
​
(
𝐤
)
​
∂
j
ln
​
P
tot
​
(
𝐤
)
]
​
V
eff
​
(
𝐤
)
,
F_{ij}=\frac{1}{2}\int_{k_{\rm min}}^{k_{\rm max}}\frac{d^{3}k}{(2\pi)^{3}}[\partial_{i}\textrm{ln}P_{\rm tot}(\mathbf{k})\,\partial_{j}\textrm{ln}P_{\rm tot}(\mathbf{k})]V_{\rm eff}(\mathbf{k}),
(11)
where
V
eff
​
(
𝐤
)
V_{\rm eff}(\mathbf{k})
is the effective survey volume
(Feldman
et al.
,
1994
; Tegmark
et al.
,
1998
)
. For a comoving survey volume,
V
bin
V_{\rm bin}
,
V
bin
≃
r
2
​
(
z
¯
)
​
d
​
r
d
​
z
​
Δ
​
z
​
S
area
,
V
eff
​
(
𝐤
)
=
V
bin
​
[
n
¯
​
(
z
)
​
P
tot
​
(
𝐤
)
1
+
n
¯
​
(
z
)
​
P
tot
​
(
𝐤
)
]
2
.
\begin{split}V_{\rm bin}&\simeq r^{2}(\bar{z})\frac{dr}{dz}\Delta zS_{\rm area},\\
V_{\rm eff}(\mathbf{k})&=V_{\rm bin}\left[\frac{\bar{n}(z)P_{\rm tot}(\mathbf{k})}{1+\bar{n}(z)P_{\rm tot}(\mathbf{k})}\right]^{2}.\end{split}
(12)
Here,
r
r
is the comoving distance,
z
¯
\bar{z}
is the mean redshift,
S
area
S_{\rm area}
is the survey area, and
n
​
(
z
)
n(z)
is the comoving galaxy number density as a function of redshift. The Fisher matrix is evaluated at a particular ‘fiducial’ cosmological model, which we have taken to be a Planck 2018 flat
Λ
\Lambda
CDM cosmology
(Aghanim
et al.
,
2020
)
.
The Fisher matrix can then be inverted to provide a prediction of the covariance matrix for the chosen parameters, i.e.
C
i
​
j
=
(
F
−
1
)
i
​
j
C_{ij}=(F^{-1})_{ij}
. For these forecasts, we work with parametrised redshift-dependent cosmological functions instead of cosmological parameters, as these are less model-dependent. In each redshift bin, we allow the expansion rate
H
​
(
z
)
H(z)
, angular diameter distance
d
A
​
(
z
)
d_{A}(z)
, linear growth rate
f
​
σ
8
​
(
z
)
f\sigma_{8}(z)
, and bias
b
​
σ
8
​
(
z
)
b\sigma_{8}(z)
to be free parameters. We also include
σ
NL
\sigma_{\rm NL}
, which is marginalised over as a nuisance parameter to account for uncertainties in the modelling of non-linear scales. We do not include other modelling uncertainties, such as higher-order bias terms. Note that the full anisotropic shape of the
Hi
galaxy power spectrum is used to derive the constraints, and not just individual features such as the BAO or RSDs.
We use the
RadioFisher
5
5
5
https://github.com/philbull/RadioFisher
code
(Bull
et al.
,
2015
)
to calculate the Fisher matrix, using galaxy number count and bias values for 10,000 hours of observation using the SKA-MID AA* and AA4 configurations, and a survey area of 5,000 deg
2
. We derive these values from the S
3
-SAX and GAEA predictions presented above to give some sense of how the forecasts depend on the uncertain survey performance estimates.
Figure 6:
The angular correlation function (ACF) and variance in the 9 fields with various flux density cuts. For each angular bin, there are nine points, one for each field. The mean ACFs for the four flux density cuts are plotted in the corresponding colours in all of the panels to aid comparison; they are almost overlapping.
The fractional error on
H
​
(
z
)
H(z)
is shown in the left panel of Figure
5
. The filled markers are for Band 2 and the unfilled ones are for Band 1. At
z
<
0.1
z<0.1
, the constraints are degraded, suggesting that they are limited by sample variance, hence a larger survey area would be needed. Overall, the AA4 configuration with the GAEA simulation consistently gives constraints that are better than 10
%
\%
in both frequency bands, dropping as low as 2–3% at
z
≈
0.4
z\approx 0.4
. The other configurations/simulations also give constraints that are better than 10
%
\%
, but only for
z
≤
0.5
z\leq 0.5
; beyond that redshift, the fractional uncertainty can be up to 11 times larger, as in the case of the AA* S
3
-SAX prediction at
z
∼
0.9
z\sim 0.9
.
With the AA4 configuration, the differences in fractional errors on the cosmological parameters between the two simulations are within 3–4% in Band 1, while they are within 5–10% for the AA* configuration in the same band. In other words, the performance differs by a factor of several depending on the simulation used. The fractional error on
d
A
​
(
z
)
d_{A}(z)
is generally similar to that of
H
​
(
z
)
H(z)
, as shown in the right panel, with only minor differences in the values.
It should be noted that, even with the relatively optimistic assumptions that the full shape of the power spectrum can be modelled, and that 10,000 hours of survey time can be used, the forecast constraints from SKA-MID surveys are significantly poorer than comparable optical galaxy surveys. The most directly comparable is the DESI Bright Galaxy Survey
(BGS; Hahn
et al.
,
2023
)
, which operates at similar redshifts, but will ultimately cover 14,000 deg
2
with
∼
10
3
\sim 10^{3}
galaxies per square degree. Its very wide survey area goes some way to mitigating the small cosmic volumes available at low redshift.
Ultimately, greater survey volumes (i.e. more available Fourier modes) are needed to beat down sample variance and improve the cosmological constraints, and this can only be achieved efficiently by going to higher redshifts, e.g.
z
∼
1
−
2
z\sim 1-2
, as targeted by emission line galaxy surveys at optical wavelengths. The predicted
Hi
galaxy number densities for wide SKA-MID surveys (flux density rms around 100
μ
\mu
Jy) are too low at these redshifts however. A much larger array – an “SKA2” class instrument
(Yahya
et al.
,
2015
; Bull,
2016
)
– would be needed to achieve a flux density rms of
≲
10
​
μ
\lesssim 10~\mu
Jy or below, resulting in competitive cosmological constraints, e.g. at the sub-percent level on
H
​
(
z
)
H(z)
and
d
A
​
(
z
)
d_{A}(z)
.
5
Angular Correlation Function and Halo Occupation Distribution
In this section, we make use of the TNG300 dataset at snapshot
z
=
0
z=0
to construct nine different realisations of mock
Hi
galaxy redshift surveys over a square field of view of side length 20
∘
, as shown in Figure
1
. For each realisation, we set the flux density threshold to
S
rms
=
[
100
,
250
,
500
]
​
μ
S_{\rm rms}=[100,250,500]\,\mu
Jy, calculate the angular correlation functions of galaxies above these thresholds, and fit the functions using a halo model to infer the 1- and 2-halo terms of the power spectrum, given by
P
1
−
halo
=
1
n
¯
gal
2
​
∫
d
​
n
d
​
M
h
​
d
​
M
h
​
N
¯
c
​
f
c
​
[
N
¯
s
2
​
u
s
2
​
(
k
)
+
2
​
N
¯
s
​
u
s
​
(
k
)
]
P
2
−
halo
=
(
1
n
¯
gal
​
∫
d
​
n
d
​
M
h
​
d
​
M
h
​
b
​
(
M
h
)
​
N
¯
c
​
[
f
c
+
N
¯
s
​
u
s
​
(
k
)
]
)
2
​
P
lin
​
(
k
)
.
\begin{split}P_{\rm 1-halo}&=\frac{1}{\bar{n}_{\rm gal}^{2}}\int\frac{\textrm{d}n}{\textrm{d}M_{h}}\textrm{d}M_{h}\,\bar{N}_{c}f_{c}[\bar{N}_{s}^{2}u^{2}_{s}(k)+2\bar{N}_{s}u_{s}(k)]\\
P_{\rm 2-halo}&=\left(\frac{1}{\bar{n}_{\rm gal}}\int\frac{\textrm{d}n}{\textrm{d}M_{h}}\textrm{d}M_{h}\,b(M_{h})\bar{N}_{c}[f_{c}+\bar{N}_{s}u_{s}(k)]\right)^{2}{P_{\rm lin}(k)}.\end{split}
(13)
Here,
n
¯
gal
\bar{n}_{\rm gal}
is the mean galaxy number density,
d
​
n
/
d
​
M
h
{\textrm{d}n}/{\textrm{d}M_{h}}
is the halo mass function,
N
¯
c
\bar{N}_{c}
is the mean number of central galaxies,
N
¯
s
\bar{N}_{s}
is the mean number of satellite galaxies,
u
s
​
(
k
)
u_{s}(k)
is the normalised satellite galaxy density profile,
f
c
f_{c}
is the observed fraction of central galaxies, and
P
lin
​
(
k
)
P_{\rm lin}(k)
is the linear matter power spectrum
(Nicola
et al.
,
2020
; Ye
et al.
,
2025
)
. The sum of the 1- and 2-halo terms give the full galaxy power spectrum,
P
​
(
k
)
P(k)
. The bias can then be calculated from the full power spectrum as
b
gal
2
​
(
k
)
=
P
​
(
k
)
P
lin
​
(
k
)
.
b_{\rm gal}^{2}(k)=\frac{P(k)}{P_{\rm lin}(k)}.
(14)
We briefly describe the angular two-point correlation function and its covariance matrix in Section
5.1
, and the Bayesian inference method we have applied in Section
5.2
. We then discuss the results in Section
5.3
.
Figure 7:
The halo model predictions for the 1-halo term (dash dot line), 2-halo term (dashed line), and the full halo model (solid line) with the various flux density cuts. The curves shown are averages of the posterior means from the nine fields, while the shaded regions show the scatter (standard deviation) over the nine fields. The integral constraint and shot noise are not included here (although they are included when performing the inference in each field).
5.1
Angular correlation function and its covariance
The angular correlation function
w
​
(
θ
)
w(\theta)
is defined as
w
​
(
θ
)
=
⟨
δ
g
​
(
θ
+
θ
c
)
​
δ
g
​
(
θ
c
)
⟩
,
w(\theta)=\langle\delta_{\rm g}(\theta+\theta_{\rm c})\,\delta_{\rm g}(\theta_{\rm c})\rangle,
(15)
where
δ
g
\delta_{\rm g}
is the galaxy overdensity,
θ
\theta
is the angular separation, and
θ
c
\theta_{\rm c}
is a reference angular position. It quantifies the projected clustering of galaxies compared to a random Poisson distribution. If the pair counts are performed in discrete angular bins, the equation is effectively
w
​
(
θ
α
)
=
∑
p
,
q
δ
g
(
p
)
​
δ
g
(
q
)
​
Θ
p
​
q
α
∑
p
,
q
Θ
p
​
q
α
.
w(\theta_{\alpha})=\frac{\sum_{p,q}\delta_{\rm g}^{(p)}\delta_{\rm g}^{(q)}\Theta^{\alpha}_{pq}}{\sum_{p,q}\Theta^{\alpha}_{pq}}.
(16)
Here,
α
\alpha
is the angular bin,
p
p
and
q
q
are the unique pairs of
Hi
galaxies in the field, and
Θ
p
​
q
α
\Theta^{\alpha}_{pq}
is an indicator function where
Θ
p
​
q
α
=
{
1
if
​
θ
∈
α
0
if
​
θ
∉
α
.
\Theta^{\alpha}_{pq}=\begin{cases}1\hskip 14.22636pt\text{if }\theta\in\alpha\\
0\hskip 14.22636pt\text{if }\theta\notin\alpha.\end{cases}
To take into account possible limitations in the data, e.g. masked regions and variable depth, statistical estimators such as the Peebles
(Peebles and Hauser,
1974
)
or Landy-Szalay estimators
(Landy and Szalay,
1993
)
are commonly used to measure
w
​
(
θ
)
w(\theta)
. Because of its lower variance and bias, we have chosen to use the Landy-Szalay estimator, which is given by
w
​
(
θ
)
=
N
d
​
d
−
2
​
N
d
​
r
+
N
r
​
r
N
r
​
r
.
w(\theta)=\frac{N_{dd}-2N_{dr}+N_{rr}}{N_{rr}}.
(17)
For a binned angular separation
θ
\theta
,
N
d
​
d
N_{dd}
is the number of galaxy-galaxy pairs,
N
d
​
r
N_{dr}
is the number galaxy-random pairs, and
N
d
​
r
N_{dr}
is the number of random-random pairs. ‘Randoms’ are catalogues of points placed at random according to a Poisson distribution, but that have the same mask/selection function as the real galaxies. In this work, we use the
TreeCorr
package
(Jarvis
et al.
,
2004
; Jarvis,
2015
)
to estimate the angular correlation function in 15 angular separation bins that are equally spaced on a logarithmic scale between 0.01
∘
and 2
∘
. The random catalogue is generated following a uniform distribution between
−
10
∘
-10^{\circ}
and
10
∘
10^{\circ}
. In each field, the total number of randoms being generated is 10 times the number of the observed galaxies, to help reduce the variance of the estimator.
Next, we use the jackknife method to calculate the covariance matrix of the angular correlation function,
C
C
, given by
C
=
N
patch
−
1
N
patch
​
∑
i
(
w
i
−
w
¯
)
T
​
(
w
i
−
w
¯
)
.
C=\frac{N_{\rm patch}-1}{N_{\rm patch}}\sum_{i}(w_{i}-\bar{w})^{\rm T}(w_{i}-\bar{w}).
(18)
Here,
N
patch
N_{\rm patch}
is the number of patches that we have sub-divided each survey area into,
w
i
w_{i}
is the estimated correlation function excluding the
i
i
’th patch, and
w
¯
\bar{w}
is the mean correlation function across all patches. In our work, we have set
N
patch
=
500
N_{\rm patch}=500
to reduce the variance on the estimated covariance matrix.
We present the angular correlation function in each of the nine fields with flux density cuts of 100 (left panel), 250 (middle panel), and 500
μ
\mu
Jy (right panel) in Figure
6
. At low separations,
θ
≤
0.1
∘
\theta\leq 0.1^{\circ}
, the values of the angular correlation functions across the nine fields are consistently within a factor of 3. The largest differences are at
θ
≥
0.5
∘
\theta\geq 0.5^{\circ}
, where it can vary by almost two orders of magnitude.
For reference, in Appendix
A
we also present correlation matrices for the angular correlation function bins in each of the nine fields for galaxies brighter than 100
μ
\mu
Jy. These show that our jackknife covariance estimation procedure is appropriate, and that the logarithmic binning in separation produces almost-independent correlation function bins, with only mild correlations between neighbouring bins at separations of tens of arcminutes.
Figure 8:
The mean and uncertainty of the galaxy bias from the halo model (circle) and
Hi
simulations (triangles as labelled) as a function of flux density threshold at
z
=
0.05
z=0.05
. The mean and uncertainty are calculated from the mean and standard deviation of the fitted bias of the nine fields. The shaded region shows the observed bias with
S
rms
=
2.4
S_{\rm rms}=2.4
mJy from the ALFALFA survey
(Obuljen
et al.
,
2019
)
. The dotted, dashed-dot, and dashed lines are extrapolated values at higher
S
rms
S_{\rm rms}
.
5.2
Bayesian parameter inference for the HOD model
To fit the halo occupation distribution to the angular correlation function, we use the same method as
Ye
et al.
(
2025
)
. Using the halo occupation distribution model from
CCL
(Chisari
et al.
,
2019
)
, we vary four parameters,
𝐩
\mathbf{p}
= [log
M
min
10
{}_{10}M_{\rm min}
, log
M
1
10
{}_{10}M_{1}
,
f
c
f_{c}
,
β
g
\beta_{g}
]. These represent the logarithm of the minimum mass halo that can host a central galaxy; the logarithm of the halo mass for which one satellite galaxy is hosted by a halo; the observed fraction of central galaxies; and a quantity that relates the spatial distribution of satellite galaxies to their host haloes. The values of the model angular correlation function
w
m
​
(
θ
,
𝐩
)
w^{\rm m}(\theta,\mathbf{p})
and galaxy number density
n
g
m
​
(
𝐩
)
n_{\rm g}^{\rm m}(\mathbf{p})
calculated from a given set of parameters are then used to evaluate the likelihood function in a Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) setting using the
emcee
package
(Foreman-Mackey
et al.
,
2013
)
. The likelihood function is given by
log
​
ℒ
\displaystyle\mathrm{log}\mathcal{L}
=
−
1
2
(
∑
i
,
j
[
w
d
(
θ
i
)
−
w
m
(
θ
i
,
𝐩
)
]
C
i
​
j
−
1
[
w
d
(
θ
j
)
−
w
m
(
θ
j
,
𝐩
)
]
\displaystyle=-\frac{1}{2}\left(\sum_{i,j}[w^{\rm d}(\theta_{i})-w^{\rm m}(\theta_{i},\mathbf{p})]\,C_{ij}^{-1}\,[w^{\rm d}(\theta_{j})-w^{\rm m}(\theta_{j},\mathbf{p})]\right.
+
[
log
​
n
gal
d
−
log
​
n
gal
theor
​
(
𝐩
)
]
2
σ
log
​
n
gal
2
)
,
\displaystyle~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~+\left.\frac{[\mathrm{log}\,n_{\rm gal}^{\rm d}-\mathrm{log}\,n_{\rm gal}^{\rm theor}(\mathbf{p})]^{2}}{\sigma^{2}_{\mathrm{log}\,n_{\rm gal}}}\right),
(19)
where the superscripts d and m correspond to the values for data and model respectively,
n
gal
theor
n_{\rm gal}^{\rm theor}
is the theoretical number density from the halo model, and
σ
log
​
n
gal
\sigma_{\mathrm{log}\,n_{\rm gal}}
is the standard deviation of
log
​
n
gal
{\mathrm{log}\,n_{\rm gal}}
, chosen to be 10% of
log
​
n
gal
d
{\mathrm{log}\,n_{\rm gal}^{\rm d}}
. This second term is an ad hoc regularisation term intended to penalise models that predict strongly incorrect number counts. Here,
w
m
​
(
θ
i
,
𝐩
)
w^{\rm m}(\theta_{i},\mathbf{p})
is related to the theoretical value from the halo model,
w
theor
​
(
θ
i
,
𝐩
)
w^{\rm theor}(\theta_{i},\mathbf{p})
, following
w
m
​
(
θ
i
,
𝐩
)
=
w
theor
​
(
θ
i
,
𝐩
)
−
∑
i
N
r
​
r
​
w
d
​
(
θ
i
)
N
r
​
r
+
1
N
gal
,
w^{\rm m}(\theta_{i},\mathbf{p})=w^{\rm theor}(\theta_{i},\mathbf{p})-\frac{\sum_{i}N_{rr}w^{\rm d}(\theta_{i})}{N_{rr}}+\frac{1}{N_{\rm gal}},
(20)
where
N
gal
N_{\rm gal}
is the total number of galaxies in the comoving volume. The second term here is the integral constraint
(IC; Groth and Peebles,
1977
)
, added to account for finite volume effects, and the final term is the shot noise.
We use the same priors described in
Ye
et al.
(
2025
)
for our four parameters, and run the MCMC with 32 walkers and 10,000 iterations. We discard the first 20
%
\%
of each chain as burn-in, and visually inspect the rest to ensure they have reached acceptable convergence.
5.3
Parameter inference results
Figure
7
shows the mean halo model predictions for the 1-halo term (dash-dot line), 2-halo term (dashed line), and the full halo model (solid line) as well as their uncertainty (shaded region), for the various flux density cuts. To clarify, the mean and uncertainty have been calculated over the posterior means for each of the nine fields. In general, there is minimal difference in the angular correlation function of the 2-halo term for all three flux density thresholds, except at
θ
≥
0.5
∘
\theta\geq 0.5^{\circ}
. In contrast, the angular correlation function of the 1-halo term starts to show differences as a function of flux density threshold at
θ
∼
0.03
∘
\theta\sim 0.03^{\circ}
, going up to a factor of 5 difference at
θ
∼
0.2
∘
\theta\sim 0.2^{\circ}
.
Figure
8
shows the galaxy bias,
b
gal
b_{\rm gal}
, computed from the posterior mean HOD model (circle), compared with the values estimated from the
Hi
simulations (triangles) as a function of flux density threshold. We also include the observed bias at
S
rms
=
2.4
S_{\rm rms}=2.4
mJy from the ALFALFA survey, marked as a shaded region. Similar to the halo model, the mean and uncertainty of the galaxy bias are calculated from the mean and standard deviation of the fitted bias in the nine fields. The HOD model bias value has been calculated following Equation
14
, in which the posterior mean values of the HOD parameters are used to calculate the full power spectrum. The values for the
Hi
simulations are taken from the fitting functions (points and solid lines), while the dotted, dashed-dot, and dashed lines show extrapolated values of these out to higher
S
rms
S_{\rm rms}
. While most are very flat with flux density threshold, the GAEA results are not, and so we use polynomial fits with different degrees to extrapolate, to highlight the uncertainty in this extrapolation.
It can be seen that
b
gal
b_{\rm gal}
from the HOD model has a slightly downward trend as the flux density threshold increases, with a change of
Δ
​
b
gal
=
−
0.05
\Delta b_{\rm gal}=-0.05
as the flux density threshold increases by an order of magnitude. This could be caused in part by the lack of redshift evolution of the haloes, as we are only using the data at one snapshot, for smaller sub-volumes of the 300 Mpc/
h
h
simulation. The change in mean halo mass as a function of flux density threshold was also studied in Sect.
3.1.2
, where comparatively little evolution was found.
The
b
gal
b_{\rm gal}
values inferred from the HOD model inference are closest to the results from GAEA, although the values for the other simulations are within about 20% of this.
Finally, we present the mean and standard deviation of the four free HOD model parameters with the various flux density thresholds in Table
4
. In this case, the mean and standard deviation are calculated over the posterior mean values from each of the nine sky realisations. We also include an example corner plot of the marginal posterior distribution of these parameters for one sky realisation with
S
rms
=
100
​
μ
S_{\rm rms}=100\,\mu
Jy in Figure
9
. The mean values of
log
10
⁡
M
min
\log_{10}M_{\rm min}
and
f
c
f_{c}
slightly decrease as the flux density threshold increases. The mean value of
log
10
⁡
M
1
\log_{10}M_{1}
, however, increases as a function of flux density threshold, which indicates that the mass of halos hosting an average of one satellite galaxy per halo increases as we increase the flux density cut.
Given the relative insensitivity of the clustering results to flux density threshold, we suggest that the model parameters collated in Table
4
should be suitable for use as fiducial parameter values for other theoretical HOD model predictions of low-redshift
Hi
galaxy clustering observables.
S
rms
S_{\rm rms}
log
M
min
10
{}_{10}M_{\rm min}
log
M
1
10
{}_{10}M_{1}
f
c
f_{c}
β
g
\beta_{g}
100
μ
\mu
Jy
9.96
±
\pm
0.53
12.58
±
\pm
0.07
0.426
±
\pm
0.20
0.265
±
\pm
0.12
250
μ
\mu
Jy
9.92
±
\pm
0.54
12.68
±
\pm
0.09
0.371
±
\pm
0.18
0.212
±
\pm
0.12
500
μ
\mu
Jy
9.78
±
\pm
0.58
12.86
±
\pm
0.11
0.255
±
\pm
0.17
0.151
±
\pm
0.09
Table 4:
The mean and standard deviation of the parameters log
M
min
10
{}_{10}M_{\rm min}
, log
M
1
10
{}_{10}M_{1}
,
f
c
f_{c}
, and
β
g
\beta_{g}
over the 9 sky realisations with the various flux density thresholds.
Figure 9:
Corner plot of the marginalised posterior distribution of the parameters log
M
min
10
{}_{10}M_{\rm min}
, log
M
1
10
{}_{10}M_{1}
,
f
c
f_{c}
, and
β
g
\beta_{g}
for one sky realisation with
S
rms
=
100
​
μ
S_{\rm rms}=100\mu
Jy.
6
Conclusions
With radio telescope arrays now reaching the sensitivity required to perform large cosmological surveys of galaxies – numbering in the hundreds of thousands or more – it is useful to be able to predict their performance to see how well they should be able to constrain cosmological parameters. The main quantities needed for such forecasts are the number density of galaxies as a function of redshift, and the galaxy bias with respect to the underlying dark matter field. The former sets the shot noise level, while the latter sets the overall amplitude of the galaxy power spectrum.
Radio galaxies are easiest to detect through their continuum emission, but this lacks spectral features that would be suitable for estimating redshifts. The most promising
spectroscopic
galaxy redshift tracer at radio wavelengths is the 21cm line from neutral hydrogen (
Hi
) embedded within the galaxies. Indeed, the prospect of observing such galaxies on a massive scale, all the way out to
z
∼
10
z\sim 10
, was one of the early drivers of what has now become the Square Kilometre Array Observatory
(Wilkinson,
1991
)
. It is very faint however, and to date only a few galaxies have been observed through this line beyond the local Universe. As a result, our observational knowledge of the number counts and bias of
Hi
galaxies is quite poor.
Simulations can be used to plug this knowledge gap, allowing predictions to be made of the numbers of faint galaxies that will become detectable only with forthcoming arrays. In this paper, we have compared the
Hi
galaxy number count and bias as a function of redshift and sensitivity threshold from three simulations that use different methods to model galaxies: S
3
-SAX, GAEA, and IllustrisTNG. We found a large spread in their predictions. At low redshift, the number densities disagree with one another by a factor of a few, but this grows to more than an order of magnitude above
z
≳
0.5
z\gtrsim 0.5
for higher flux density thresholds (
≳
10
​
μ
\gtrsim 10\,\mu
Jy), and above
z
≳
1
z\gtrsim 1
for lower flux density thresholds (
≲
10
​
μ
\lesssim 10\,\mu
Jy). The bias is also quite uncertain, at the tens of percent level at
z
≃
0
z\simeq 0
, rising to about 100% above
z
≳
1
z\gtrsim 1
.
For near-term surveys with arrays such as SKA-MID and its precursors, the theoretical uncertainty in the bias is broadly tolerable, and will affect predictions only at around the
∼
10
%
\sim 10\%
level. For the number counts, however, the large disagreements are potentially more significant.
Due to the poor bias estimate from IllustrisTNG, we only used values from S
3
-SAX and GAEA to forecast the cosmological performance of a proposed SKA-MID cosmological survey using the Fisher Matrix method. We found that the SKA-MID AA4 configuration using the GAEA simulation’s predicted numbers gives constraints on
H
​
(
z
)
H(z)
and
d
A
​
(
z
)
d_{A}(z)
that are better than 10
%
\%
, improving to 2–3
%
\%
at
z
≈
0.4
z\approx 0.4
. With the other configurations/simulations, the constraints that are also better than 10
%
\%
for
z
<
0.5
z<0.5
, but beyond that can degrade significantly, reaching uncertainties that are up to 11 times larger. Comparing the two SKA configurations, with AA4 the differences between the two simulations are within 3–4
%
\%
in Band 1, while the differences are within 5–10
%
\%
for AA* in the same band.
In summary, our results show that the cosmology forecasts at low redshift are mildly dependent on the simulation used to derive the number counts and bias. At higher redshift,
z
≳
0.5
z\gtrsim 0.5
, i.e. SKA-MID Band 1, there are large differences depending on the simulation used. The reason for the insensitivity at low redshift is that sample variance (due to the limited cosmic volume available at low redshift) rapidly becomes the dominant source of uncertainty on the measured two-point statistics, while at higher redshift, the different shot noise levels are more consequential.
To model a near-future
Hi
galaxy survey at low redshift, we also took sub-samples of galaxies from IllustrisTNG-300 and subjected them to a realistic galaxy clustering analysis, in which the angular correlation function in a single redshift bin is fit using a Halo Occupation Distribution (HOD) model. We performed this analysis separately on nine sub-volumes of the simulations, each spanning a square field of view of 20
∘
on each side, with up to about 20,000
Hi
galaxies per sub-volume. Splitting the volume in this way allows us to assess sample variance effects (which are particularly important for the smaller survey volumes available at low redshift).
We found that the measured angular correlation functions had some scatter between sub-volumes, but their average was remarkably consistent over different flux density thresholds. The 1-halo term had the largest spread with respect to flux density threshold, with a factor of 5 difference at an angular separation of
θ
∼
0.2
∘
\theta\sim 0.2^{\circ}
. There is minimal difference in the 2-halo term except at
θ
>
0.5
∘
\theta>0.5^{\circ}
however.
One explanation for this is found in the observation that the mean host halo mass varies quite slowly as a function of flux density. Since the distribution of halo masses is what governs the large-scale clustering behaviour for a galaxy population within the halo model, this may explain the insensitivity to flux density threshold. We also investigated the galaxy bias,
b
gal
b_{\rm gal}
, finding that it decreased only slightly as a function of flux density threshold, with
Δ
​
b
gal
=
−
6
%
\Delta b_{\rm gal}=-6\%
as the flux density threshold is increased by an order of magnitude. We also compared the HOD-derived bias with the simulation and fitting function predictions, finding agreement to within about 20% across all of the simulations.
Finally, we explored the inferred means and standard deviations of the HOD parameters, which are
log
10
⁡
M
min
\log_{10}M_{\rm min}
,
log
10
⁡
M
1
\log_{10}M_{1}
,
f
c
f_{c}
, and
β
g
\beta_{g}
. We observed that most parameters have a downward trend with respect to the flux density threshold, except
log
10
⁡
M
1
\log_{10}M_{1}
, which has an upward trend.
In conclusion, we have investigated how well different
Hi
-containing simulations agree with one other, showing that there is substantial disagreement between them in terms of their predictions for
Hi
galaxy observables. This does not greatly affect cosmological forecasts at the low redshifts relevant to Band 2 of SKA-MID, but becomes much more important at the higher redshifts covered by Band 1. Moreover, the fitting functions used to predict the number density and bias of
Hi
galaxies may not have an accurate fit at low redshifts, as seems to be the case for S
3
-SAX for example. As new
Hi
galaxy survey data arrive, we will have ample opportunity to test and refine these simulation models, but in the meantime, predictions made from such simulations should be assigned a significant theoretical uncertainty.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to J. Healy, J. Mayor, and A. Nicola for useful discussions. This result is part of a project that has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant agreement No. 948764).
Data Availability
The simulations that our results are based on are publicly available via their respective references/data repositories. Our analysis and fitting code is available from
https://github.com/isabelleye1/ACF-halomodel-mcmc/tree/HIgal
.
References
N. Aghanim, Y. Akrami, F. Arroja, M. Ashdown, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi, M. Ballardini, A. J. Banday, R. Barreiro, N. Bartolo,
et al.
(2020)
Planck 2018 results-i. overview and the cosmological legacy of planck
.
Astronomy & Astrophysics
641
,
pp. A1
.
Cited by:
§4
.
D. Alonso, E. Bellini, C. Hale, M. J. Jarvis, and D. J. Schwarz (2021)
Cross-correlating radio continuum surveys and CMB lensing: constraining redshift distributions, galaxy bias, and cosmology
.
MNRAS
502
(
1
),
pp. 876–887
.
External Links:
Document
,
2009.01817
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Asgari, A. J. Mead, and C. Heymans (2023)
The halo model for cosmology: a pedagogical review
.
The Open Journal of Astrophysics
6
,
pp. 39
.
External Links:
Document
,
2303.08752
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Avila, V. Gonzalez-Perez, F. G. Mohammad, A. de Mattia, C. Zhao, A. Raichoor, A. Tamone, S. Alam, J. Bautista, D. Bianchi, E. Burtin, M. J. Chapman, C.-H. Chuang, J. Comparat, K. Dawson, T. Divers, H. du Mas des Bourboux, H. Gil-Marin, E. M. Mueller, S. Habib, K. Heitmann, V. Ruhlmann-Kleider, N. Padilla, W. J. Percival, A. J. Ross, H. J. Seo, D. P. Schneider, and G. Zhao (2020)
The Completed SDSS-IV extended Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey: exploring the halo occupation distribution model for emission line galaxies
.
MNRAS
499
(
4
),
pp. 5486–5507
.
External Links:
Document
,
2007.09012
Cited by:
§1
.
A. A. Berlind and D. H. Weinberg (2002)
The Halo Occupation Distribution: Toward an Empirical Determination of the Relation between Galaxies and Mass
.
ApJ
575
(
2
),
pp. 587–616
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0109001
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
.
C. Blake, P. G. Ferreira, and J. Borrill (2004)
The angular power spectrum of NVSS radio galaxies
.
MNRAS
351
(
3
),
pp. 923–934
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0404085
Cited by:
§1
.
P. Bull, P. G. Ferreira, P. Patel, and M. G. Santos (2015)
LATE-time cosmology with 21 cm intensity mapping experiments
.
The Astrophysical Journal
803
(
1
),
pp. 21
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
§4
,
§4
,
§4
.
P. Bull (2016)
Extending cosmological tests of General Relativity with the Square Kilometre Array
.
Astrophys. J.
817
(
1
),
pp. 26
.
External Links:
1509.07562
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
,
§4
.
P. Bull (2017)
A galaxy-halo model for multiple cosmological tracers
.
MNRAS
471
(
1
),
pp. 12–27
.
External Links:
Document
,
1610.08948
Cited by:
§1
.
N. E. Chisari, D. Alonso, E. Krause, C. D. Leonard, P. Bull, J. Neveu, A. Villarreal, S. Singh, T. McClintock, J. Ellison, Z. Du, J. Zuntz, A. Mead, S. Joudaki, C. S. Lorenz, T. Tröster, J. Sanchez, F. Lanusse, M. Ishak, R. Hlozek, J. Blazek, J. Campagne, H. Almoubayyed, T. Eifler, M. Kirby, D. Kirkby, S. Plaszczynski, A. Slosar, M. Vrastil, E. L. Wagoner, and (. D. E. S. Collaboration) (2019)
Core cosmology library: precision cosmological predictions for lsst
.
The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series
242
(
1
),
pp. 2
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
§1
,
§5.2
.
C. Conroy, R. H. Wechsler, and A. V. Kravtsov (2006)
Modeling Luminosity-dependent Galaxy Clustering through Cosmic Time
.
ApJ
647
(
1
),
pp. 201–214
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0512234
Cited by:
§1
.
A. Cooray and R. Sheth (2002)
Halo models of large scale structure
.
Physics Reports
372
(
1
),
pp. 1–129
.
External Links:
ISSN 0370-1573
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
§1
.
C. M. Cress, D. J. Helfand, R. H. Becker, M. D. Gregg, and R. L. White (1996)
The angular two-point correlation function for the first radio survey
.
Astrophys. J.
473
,
pp. 7
.
External Links:
astro-ph/9606176
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
G. De Lucia and J. Blaizot (2007)
The hierarchical formation of the brightest cluster galaxies
.
MNRAS
375
(
1
),
pp. 2–14
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0606519
Cited by:
§3.2
,
§3.2
.
G. De Lucia, L. Tornatore, C. S. Frenk, A. Helmi, J. F. Navarro, and S. D. M. White (2014)
Elemental abundances in Milky Way-like galaxies from a hierarchical galaxy formation model
.
MNRAS
445
(
1
),
pp. 970–987
.
External Links:
Document
,
1407.7867
Cited by:
§3.2
.
B. Diemer, A. R. H. Stevens, C. d. P. Lagos, A. R. Calette, S. Tacchella, L. Hernquist, F. Marinacci, D. Nelson, A. Pillepich, V. Rodriguez-Gomez, F. Villaescusa-Navarro, and M. Vogelsberger (2019)
Atomic and molecular gas in illustristng galaxies at low redshift
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
487
(
2
),
pp. 1529–1550
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/487/2/1529/28766047/stz1323.pdf
Cited by:
§3.1
.
A. R. Duffy, M. J. Meyer, L. Staveley-Smith, M. Bernyk, D. J. Croton, B. S. Koribalski, D. Gerstmann, and S. Westerlund (2012)
Predictions for askap neutral hydrogen surveys
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
426
(
4
),
pp. 3385–3402
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/426/4/3385/3338965/426-4-3385.pdf
Cited by:
§3.1
,
§3.1
.
H. A. Feldman, N. Kaiser, and J. A. Peacock (1994)
Power-Spectrum Analysis of Three-dimensional Redshift Surveys
.
ApJ
426
,
pp. 23
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/9304022
Cited by:
§4
.
D. Foreman-Mackey, A. Conley, W. Meierjurgen Farr, D. W. Hogg, D. Lang, P. Marshall, A. Price-Whelan, J. Sanders, and J. Zuntz (2013)
emcee: The MCMC Hammer
Note:
Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:1303.002
External Links:
1303.002
Cited by:
§5.2
.
R. Giovanelli and M. P. Haynes (2015)
Extragalactic HI surveys
.
A&ARv
24
,
pp. 1
.
External Links:
Document
,
1510.04660
Cited by:
§1
.
E. J. Groth and P. J. E. Peebles (1977)
Statistical analysis of catalogs of extragalactic objects. VII. Two- and three-point correlation functions for the high-resolution Shane-Wirtanen catalog of galaxies.
.
ApJ
217
,
pp. 385–405
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§5.2
.
H. Guo, Z. Zheng, P. S. Behroozi, I. Zehavi, C. Chuang, J. Comparat, G. Favole, S. Gottloeber, A. Klypin, F. Prada, S. A. Rodríguez-Torres, D. H. Weinberg, and G. Yepes (2016)
Modelling galaxy clustering: halo occupation distribution versus subhalo matching
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
459
(
3
),
pp. 3040–3058
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/459/3/3040/8108659/stw845.pdf
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
.
C. Hahn, M. J. Wilson, O. Ruiz-Macias, S. Cole, D. H. Weinberg, J. Moustakas, A. Kremin, J. L. Tinker, A. Smith, R. H. Wechsler, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, S. Bailey, D. Brooks, A. P. Cooper, T. M. Davis, K. Dawson, A. Dey, B. Dey, S. Eftekharzadeh, D. J. Eisenstein, K. Fanning, J. E. Forero-Romero, C. S. Frenk, E. Gaztañaga, S. G. A Gontcho, J. Guy, K. Honscheid, M. Ishak, S. Juneau, R. Kehoe, T. Kisner, T. Lan, M. Landriau, L. Le Guillou, M. E. Levi, C. Magneville, P. Martini, A. Meisner, A. D. Myers, J. Nie, P. Norberg, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, W. J. Percival, C. Poppett, F. Prada, A. Raichoor, A. J. Ross, S. Gaines, C. Saulder, E. Schlafly, D. Schlegel, D. Sierra-Porta, G. Tarle, B. A. Weaver, C. Yèche, P. Zarrouk, R. Zhou, Z. Zhou, and H. Zou (2023)
The DESI Bright Galaxy Survey: Final Target Selection, Design, and Validation
.
AJ
165
(
6
),
pp. 253
.
External Links:
Document
,
2208.08512
Cited by:
§4
.
C. L. Hale, D. J. Schwarz, P. N. Best, S. J. Nakoneczny, D. Alonso, D. Bacon, L. Böhme, N. Bhardwaj, M. Bilicki, S. Camera, C. S. Heneka, M. Pashapour-Ahmadabadi, P. Tiwari, J. Zheng, K. J. Duncan, M. J. Jarvis, R. Kondapally, M. Magliocchetti, H. J. A. Rottgering, and T. W. Shimwell (2024)
Cosmology from LOFAR Two-metre Sky Survey Data Release 2: angular clustering of radio sources
.
MNRAS
527
(
3
),
pp. 6540–6568
.
External Links:
Document
,
2310.07627
Cited by:
§1
.
J. Hamlett, C. L. Hale, M. J. Jarvis, D. Alonso, N. Stylianou, and I. H. Whittam (2026)
MIGHTEE: the dark matter haloes, duty cycle, and mechanical feedback from radio-AGN up to z
∼
\sim
2.5
.
MNRAS
547
(
4
),
pp. stag468
.
External Links:
Document
,
2603.06463
Cited by:
§1
.
I. Harrison, M. Lochner, and M. L. Brown (2017)
Redshifts for galaxies in radio continuum surveys from Bayesian model fitting of HI 21-cm lines
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:1704.08278
.
External Links:
Document
,
1704.08278
Cited by:
§1
.
M. P. Haynes, R. Giovanelli, B. R. Kent, E. A. K. Adams, T. J. Balonek, D. W. Craig, D. Fertig, R. Finn, C. Giovanardi, G. Hallenbeck, K. M. Hess, G. L. Hoffman, S. Huang, M. G. Jones, R. A. Koopmann, D. A. Kornreich, L. Leisman, J. Miller, C. Moorman, J. O’Connor, A. O’Donoghue, E. Papastergis, P. Troischt, D. Stark, and L. Xiao (2018)
The Arecibo Legacy Fast ALFA Survey: The ALFALFA Extragalactic H I Source Catalog
.
ApJ
861
(
1
),
pp. 49
.
External Links:
Document
,
1805.11499
Cited by:
§1
.
C. A. Jackson and J. V. Wall (1998)
The Redshift Distribution of Extragalactic Radio Sources
.
arXiv
.
External Links:
astro-ph/9808294
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Jarvis, G. Bernstein, and B. Jain (2004)
The skewness of the aperture mass statistic
.
MNRAS
352
(
1
),
pp. 338–352
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0307393
Cited by:
§5.1
.
M. Jarvis (2015)
TreeCorr: Two-point correlation functions
Note:
Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:1508.007
External Links:
1508.007
Cited by:
§5.1
.
Y. P. Jing, H. J. Mo, and G. Börner (1998)
Spatial correlation function and pairwise velocity dispersion of galaxies: cold dark matter models versus the las campanas survey
.
The Astrophysical Journal
494
(
1
),
pp. 1
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
§1
.
A. Kazemi-Moridani, A. J. Baker, M. Verheijen, E. Gawiser, S. Blyth, D. Obreschkow, L. Chemin, J. D. Collier, K. W. Cook, J. Delhaize, E. Elson, B. S. Frank, M. Glowacki, K. M. Hess, B. W. Holwerda, Z. L. Hutchens, M. J. Jarvis, M. Kaasinen, S. Makhathini, A. Mohapatra, H. Pan, A. C. Schröder, L. Stockenstroom, M. Vaccari, T. Westmeier, J. F. Wu, and M. Zwaan (2025)
Looking at the Distant Universe with the MeerKAT Array: The H I Mass Function in the Local Universe
.
ApJ
981
(
2
),
pp. 208
.
External Links:
Document
,
2412.11426
Cited by:
§1
.
A. V. Kravtsov, A. A. Berlind, R. H. Wechsler, A. A. Klypin, S. Gottlöber, B. Allgood, and J. R. Primack (2004)
The dark side of the halo occupation distribution
.
The Astrophysical Journal
609
(
1
),
pp. 35
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
§1
.
S. D. Landy and A. S. Szalay (1993)
Bias and Variance of Angular Correlation Functions
.
ApJ
412
,
pp. 64
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§5.1
.
A. J. Loan, J. V. Wall, and O. Lahav (1997)
The correlation function of radio sources
.
Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.
286
,
pp. 994
.
External Links:
astro-ph/9612190
,
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
N. Maddox, B. S. Frank, A. A. Ponomareva, M. J. Jarvis, E. A. K. Adams, R. Davé, T. A. Oosterloo, M. G. Santos, S. L. Blyth, M. Glowacki, R. C. Kraan-Korteweg, W. Mulaudzi, B. Namumba, I. Prandoni, S. H. A. Rajohnson, K. Spekkens, N. J. Adams, R. A. A. Bowler, J. D. Collier, I. Heywood, S. Sekhar, and A. R. Taylor (2021)
MIGHTEE-HI: The H I emission project of the MeerKAT MIGHTEE survey
.
A&A
646
,
pp. A35
.
External Links:
Document
,
2011.09470
Cited by:
§1
.
R. Mandelbaum, C. Li, G. Kauffmann, and S. D. M. White (2009)
Halo masses for optically selected and for radio-loud AGN from clustering and galaxy-galaxy lensing
.
MNRAS
393
(
2
),
pp. 377–392
.
External Links:
Document
,
0806.4089
Cited by:
§1
.
F. Marinacci, M. Vogelsberger, R. Pakmor, P. Torrey, V. Springel, L. Hernquist, D. Nelson, R. Weinberger, A. Pillepich, J. Naiman, and S. Genel (2018)
First results from the IllustrisTNG simulations: radio haloes and magnetic fields
.
MNRAS
480
(
4
),
pp. 5113–5139
.
External Links:
Document
,
1707.03396
Cited by:
§3.1
.
J. Mayor, M. Spinelli, G. De Lucia, R. Yates, A. Refregier, F. Fontanot, L. Xie, and M. Hirschmann (2026)
Simulations of the 21cm emission line for upcoming large-scale hi galaxy surveys
.
External Links:
2602.21058
,
Link
Cited by:
§3.2
.
M. Meyer, A. Robotham, D. Obreschkow, T. Westmeier, A. R. Duffy, and L. Staveley-Smith (2017)
Tracing hi beyond the local universe
.
Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia
34
,
pp. e052
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3.1
.
J. P. Naiman, A. Pillepich, V. Springel, E. Ramirez-Ruiz, P. Torrey, M. Vogelsberger, R. Pakmor, D. Nelson, F. Marinacci, L. Hernquist, R. Weinberger, and S. Genel (2018)
First results from the IllustrisTNG simulations: a tale of two elements - chemical evolution of magnesium and europium
.
MNRAS
477
(
1
),
pp. 1206–1224
.
External Links:
Document
,
1707.03401
Cited by:
§3.1
.
S. J. Nakoneczny, D. Alonso, M. Bilicki, D. J. Schwarz, C. L. Hale, A. Pollo, C. Heneka, P. Tiwari, J. Zheng, M. Brüggen, M. J. Jarvis, and T. W. Shimwell (2024)
Cosmology from LOFAR Two-metre Sky Survey Data Release 2: Cross-correlation with the cosmic microwave background
.
A&A
681
,
pp. A105
.
External Links:
Document
,
2310.07642
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Negrello, M. Magliocchetti, and G. De Zotti (2006)
The large-scale clustering of radio sources
.
MNRAS
368
(
2
),
pp. 935–942
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0602283
Cited by:
§1
.
D. Nelson, A. Pillepich, V. Springel, R. Weinberger, L. Hernquist, R. Pakmor, S. Genel, P. Torrey, M. Vogelsberger, G. Kauffmann, F. Marinacci, and J. Naiman (2018)
First results from the IllustrisTNG simulations: the galaxy colour bimodality
.
MNRAS
475
(
1
),
pp. 624–647
.
External Links:
Document
,
1707.03395
Cited by:
§1
,
§3.1
.
D. Nelson, V. Springel, A. Pillepich, V. Rodriguez-Gomez, P. Torrey, S. Genel, M. Vogelsberger, R. Pakmor, F. Marinacci, R. Weinberger, L. Kelley, M. Lovell, B. Diemer, and L. Hernquist (2019)
The IllustrisTNG simulations: public data release
.
Computational Astrophysics and Cosmology
6
(
1
),
pp. 2
.
External Links:
Document
,
1812.05609
Cited by:
§3.1
.
A. Nicola, D. Alonso, J. Sánchez, A. Slosar, H. Awan, A. Broussard, J. Dunkley, E. Gawiser, Z. Gomes, R. Mandelbaum, H. Miyatake, J. A. Newman, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, S. Skinner, and E. L. Wagoner (2020)
Tomographic galaxy clustering with the subaru hyper suprime-cam first year public data release
.
Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics
2020
(
03
),
pp. 044
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
§5
.
A. Nusser and P. Tiwari (2015)
The Clustering of Radio Galaxies: Biasing and Evolution versus Stellar Mass
.
ApJ
812
(
1
),
pp. 85
.
External Links:
Document
,
1505.06817
Cited by:
§1
.
D. Obreschkow, H.-R. Klöckner, I. Heywood, F. Levrier, and S. Rawlings (2009)
A virtual sky with extragalactic h i and co lines for the square kilometre array and the atacama large millimeter/submillimeter array*
.
The Astrophysical Journal
703
(
2
),
pp. 1890
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
§1
,
§3.2
,
§3
.
A. Obuljen, D. Alonso, F. Villaescusa-Navarro, I. Yoon, and M. Jones (2019)
The H I content of dark matter haloes at z
≈
\approx
0 from ALFALFA
.
MNRAS
486
(
4
),
pp. 5124–5138
.
External Links:
Document
,
1805.00934
Cited by:
§1
,
Figure 4
,
§3.2
,
Figure 8
.
H. Padmanabhan, A. Refregier, and A. Amara (2017)
A halo model for cosmological neutral hydrogen : abundances and clustering
.
MNRAS
469
(
2
),
pp. 2323–2334
.
External Links:
Document
,
1611.06235
Cited by:
§1
.
J. A. Peacock and D. Nicholson (1991)
The large-scale clustering of radio galaxies.
.
MNRAS
253
,
pp. 307–319
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
J. A. Peacock and R. E. Smith (2000)
Halo occupation numbers and galaxy bias
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
318
(
4
),
pp. 1144–1156
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/318/4/1144/2822755/318-4-1144.pdf
Cited by:
§1
.
P. J. E. Peebles and M. G. Hauser (1974)
Statistical Analysis of Catalogs of Extragalactic Objects. III. The Shane-Wirtanen and Zwicky Catalogs
.
ApJS
28
,
pp. 19
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§5.1
.
A. Pillepich, D. Nelson, L. Hernquist, V. Springel, R. Pakmor, P. Torrey, R. Weinberger, S. Genel, J. P. Naiman, F. Marinacci, and M. Vogelsberger (2018)
First results from the IllustrisTNG simulations: the stellar mass content of groups and clusters of galaxies
.
MNRAS
475
(
1
),
pp. 648–675
.
External Links:
Document
,
1707.03406
Cited by:
§3.1
.
J. Rhee, M. Meyer, A. Popping, S. Bellstedt, S. P. Driver, A. S. G. Robotham, M. Whiting, I. K. Baldry, S. Brough, M. J. I. Brown, J. D. Bunton, R. Dodson, B. W. Holwerda, A. M. Hopkins, B. S. Koribalski, K. Lee-Waddell, Á. R. López-Sánchez, J. Loveday, E. Mahony, S. Roychowdhury, K. Rozgonyi, and L. Staveley-Smith (2023)
Deep investigation of neutral gas origins (DINGO): H I stacking experiments with early science data
.
MNRAS
518
(
3
),
pp. 4646–4671
.
External Links:
Document
,
2210.09697
Cited by:
§1
.
A. N. Salcedo, T. Eifler, and P. Behroozi (2025)
One Galaxy Sample to Rule Them All: Halo Occupation Distribution Modeling of DES Year 3 Source Galaxies
.
ApJ
983
(
2
),
pp. 183
.
External Links:
Document
,
2406.17985
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Santos, D. Alonso, P. Bull, M. B. Silva, and S. Yahya (2015)
HI galaxy simulations for the SKA: number counts and bias
.
In
Advancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14)
,
pp. 21
.
External Links:
Document
,
1501.03990
Cited by:
§1
.
R. K. Sheth and G. Tormen (1999)
Large-scale bias and the peak background split
.
MNRAS
308
(
1
),
pp. 119–126
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/9901122
Cited by:
§3.1.1
.
V. Springel, R. Pakmor, A. Pillepich, R. Weinberger, D. Nelson, L. Hernquist, M. Vogelsberger, S. Genel, P. Torrey, F. Marinacci, and J. Naiman (2018)
First results from the IllustrisTNG simulations: matter and galaxy clustering
.
MNRAS
475
(
1
),
pp. 676–698
.
External Links:
Document
,
1707.03397
Cited by:
§3.1
.
V. Springel, S. D. M. White, A. Jenkins, C. S. Frenk, N. Yoshida, L. Gao, J. Navarro, R. Thacker, D. Croton, J. Helly, J. A. Peacock, S. Cole, P. Thomas, H. Couchman, A. Evrard, J. Colberg, and F. Pearce (2005)
Simulations of the formation, evolution and clustering of galaxies and quasars
.
Nature
435
(
7042
),
pp. 629–636
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0504097
Cited by:
§3.2
.
Square Kilometre Array Cosmology Science Working Group, D. J. Bacon, R. A. Battye, P. Bull, S. Camera, P. G. Ferreira, I. Harrison, D. Parkinson, A. Pourtsidou, M. G. Santos, L. Wolz, F. Abdalla, Y. Akrami, D. Alonso, S. Andrianomena, M. Ballardini, J. L. Bernal, D. Bertacca, C. A. P. Bengaly, A. Bonaldi, C. Bonvin, M. L. Brown, E. Chapman, S. Chen, X. Chen, S. Cunnington, T. M. Davis, C. Dickinson, J. Fonseca, K. Grainge, S. Harper, M. J. Jarvis, R. Maartens, N. Maddox, H. Padmanabhan, J. R. Pritchard, A. Raccanelli, M. Rivi, S. Roychowdhury, M. Sahlén, D. J. Schwarz, T. M. Siewert, M. Viel, F. Villaescusa-Navarro, Y. Xu, D. Yamauchi, and J. Zuntz (2020)
Cosmology with Phase 1 of the Square Kilometre Array Red Book 2018: Technical specifications and performance forecasts
.
Publ. Astron. Soc. Australia
37
,
pp. e007
.
External Links:
Document
,
1811.02743
Cited by:
§1
,
§2
.
L. Staveley-Smith and T. Oosterloo (2015)
HI Science with the Square Kilometre Array
.
In
Advancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14)
,
pp. 167
.
External Links:
Document
,
1506.04473
Cited by:
§1
.
A. R. H. Stevens, B. Diemer, C. d. P. Lagos, D. Nelson, A. Pillepich, T. Brown, B. Catinella, L. Hernquist, R. Weinberger, M. Vogelsberger, and F. Marinacci (2019)
Erratum: Atomic hydrogen in IllustrisTNG galaxies: the impact of environment parallelled with local 21-cm surveys
.
MNRAS
484
(
4
),
pp. 5499–5499
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Tegmark, A. J. S. Hamilton, M. A. Strauss, M. S. Vogeley, and A. S. Szalay (1998)
Measuring the galaxy power spectrum with future redshift surveys
.
The Astrophysical Journal
499
(
2
),
pp. 555
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
§4
.
R. B. Tully and P. Fouque (1985)
The extragalactic distance scale. I - Corrections to fundamental observables.
.
ApJS
58
,
pp. 67–80
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
§3.1
.
F. Villaescusa-Navarro, S. Genel, E. Castorina, A. Obuljen, D. N. Spergel, L. Hernquist, D. Nelson, I. P. Carucci, A. Pillepich, F. Marinacci, B. Diemer, M. Vogelsberger, R. Weinberger, and R. Pakmor (2018)
Ingredients for 21 cm Intensity Mapping
.
ApJ
866
(
2
),
pp. 135
.
External Links:
Document
,
1804.09180
Cited by:
§1
.
P. N. Wilkinson (1991)
The Hydrogen Array
.
In
IAU Colloquium 131: Radio Interferometry. Theory, Techniques, and Applications
,
T. J. Cornwell and R. A. Perley (Eds.)
,
Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series
, Vol.
19
,
pp. 428–432
.
Cited by:
§6
.
S. Yahya, P. Bull, M. G. Santos, M. Silva, R. Maartens, P. Okouma, and B. Bassett (2015)
Cosmological performance of ska h i galaxy surveys
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
450
(
3
),
pp. 2251–2260
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/450/3/2251/18504481/stv695.pdf
Cited by:
§1
,
§2
,
§3.1.1
,
§3.2
,
Table 2
,
§3
,
§4
.
I. Ye, P. Bull, R. A. A. Bowler, R. K. Cochrane, N. J. Adams, and M. J. Jarvis (2025)
Angular correlation functions of bright lyman-break galaxies at 3 ≲ z ≲ 5
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
543
(
4
),
pp. 3196–3213
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/543/4/3196/64461084/staf1651.pdf
Cited by:
§1
,
§5.2
,
§5.2
,
§5
.
S. Yuan, H. Zhang, A. J. Ross, J. Donald-McCann, B. Hadzhiyska, R. H. Wechsler, Z. Zheng, S. Alam, V. Gonzalez-Perez, J. N. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, D. Bianchi, D. Brooks, A. de la Macorra, K. Fanning, J. E. Forero-Romero, K. Honscheid, M. Ishak, R. Kehoe, J. Lasker, M. Landriau, M. Manera, P. Martini, A. Meisner, R. Miquel, J. Moustakas, S. Nadathur, J. A. Newman, J. Nie, W. Percival, C. Poppett, A. Rocher, G. Rossi, E. Sanchez, L. Samushia, M. Schubnell, H. Seo, G. Tarlé, B. A. Weaver, J. Yu, Z. Zhou, and H. Zou (2024)
The DESI one-per cent survey: exploring the halo occupation distribution of luminous red galaxies and quasi-stellar objects with ABACUSSUMMIT
.
MNRAS
530
(
1
),
pp. 947–965
.
External Links:
Document
,
2306.06314
Cited by:
§1
.
Z. Zheng, A. A. Berlind, D. H. Weinberg, A. J. Benson, C. M. Baugh, S. Cole, R. Davé, C. S. Frenk, N. Katz, and C. G. Lacey (2005)
Theoretical Models of the Halo Occupation Distribution: Separating Central and Satellite Galaxies
.
ApJ
633
(
2
),
pp. 791–809
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0408564
Cited by:
§1
.
A. Zoldan, G. De Lucia, L. Xie, F. Fontanot, and M. Hirschmann (2017)
H I-selected galaxies in hierarchical models of galaxy formation and evolution
.
MNRAS
465
(
2
),
pp. 2236–2253
.
External Links:
Document
,
1610.02042
Cited by:
§1
,
§3.2
.
Figure 10:
The measured correlation matrices of
Hi
galaxies brighter than 100
μ
\mu
Jy in the 9 fields.
Appendix A
Correlation matrices for IllustrisTNG sub-fields
In Figure
10
we plot correlation matrices for the nine sub-fields of the IllustrisTNG simulation that we analysed in Section
5.1
. These are derived by taking the jackknife estimates of the covariance matrices, and scaling each element by the square root of the product of the parameter variances, i.e. the correlation matrix
ρ
i
​
j
\rho_{ij}
for covariance matrix
C
i
​
j
C_{ij}
is defined as
ρ
i
​
j
=
C
i
​
j
C
i
​
i
​
C
j
​
j
.
\rho_{ij}=\frac{C_{ij}}{\sqrt{C_{ii}\,C_{jj}}}.
(21)
The correlation matrix elements must have values between
+
1
+1
(perfectly correlated),
0
(uncorrelated), and
−
1
-1
(perfectly anti-correlated).
The general correlation structure of the matrices shown in Figure
10
is similar between fields, with relatively little correlation between angular separation bins at the smallest separations (of order arcminutes), and a moderate correlation between bins and their
2
−
4
2-4
nearest neighbours at intermediate separations of tens of arcminutes. This partly validates the jackknife covariance estimation approach for the angular correlation function for this size of field. It is also notable that there remains noticeable variation however, and so some care would need be taken in accounting for the variance on covariance estimates in a real cosmological
Hi
galaxy survey.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA