Searching for Ultracool Dwarfs in Early LSST Data Products
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
I
Introduction
II
LSST Data Preview 1
III
Known UCDs in DP1
III.1
The Ultracool Sheet
III.2
Dark Energy Survey
III.3
Gaia Catalog of Nearby Stars
IV
UCD Candidates from DP1
IV.1
LSST DP1 Data and Filtering
IV.1.1
Detection Quality Criteria
IV.1.2
SNR Criteria
IV.1.3
Extendedness Criteria
IV.1.4
Color-Color Criteria
IV.2
Selected Candidates
IV.2.1
Phototemp Estimate
V
Upcoming LSST DP2 Predictions
V.1
Road to LSST Data Release 1
V.1.1
Deep Drilling Fields
V.1.2
Science Verification Surveys
V.2
Predicted Brown Dwarf Counts
V.2.1
Deep Drilling Field Counts
V.2.2
Science Verification Survey Counts
V.3
Future Outlook
V.3.1
Infrared Cross-matching with LSST
V.3.2
LSST Astrometry
VI
Conclusion
Acknowledgements
A
Phototemp determination
References
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2604.08387v1 [astro-ph.SR] 09 Apr 2026
Searching for Ultracool Dwarfs in Early LSST Data Products
Easton J. Honaker
Delaware Space Grant Graduate Fellow
University of Delaware, Department of Physics & Astronomy, Newark, DE 19716, USA
University of Delaware, Data Science Institute, Newark, DE 19716, USA
[
John E. Gizis
University of Delaware, Department of Physics & Astronomy, Newark, DE 19716, USA
University of Delaware, Data Science Institute, Newark, DE 19716, USA
gizis@udel.edu
Christian Aganze
Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics & Cosmology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA
caganze@stanford.edu
Siddharth Chaini
University of Delaware, Department of Physics & Astronomy, Newark, DE 19716, USA
University of Delaware, Data Science Institute, Newark, DE 19716, USA
chaini@udel.edu
Federica B. Bianco
University of Delaware, Department of Physics & Astronomy, Newark, DE 19716, USA
University of Delaware, Data Science Institute, Newark, DE 19716, USA
University of Delaware, Joseph R. Biden, Jr. School of Public Policy and Administration, Newark, DE 19716, USA
fbianco@udel.edu
Maruša Žerjal
Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias, E-38205 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
Universidad de La Laguna, Dpto. Astrofísica, E-38206 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
maruska.zerjal@iac.es
Eduardo L. Martín
Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias, E-38205 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
Universidad de La Laguna, Dpto. Astrofísica, E-38206 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
ege@iac.es
Riley W. Clarke
National University of Singapore, Department of Physics, 2 Science Drive 3, Singapore 117551
rclarke@nus.edu.sg
Ashton Southwick
University of Delaware, Department of Physics & Astronomy, Newark, DE 19716, USA
ashtons@udel.edu
Harrison Petrie
University of Delaware, Department of Physics & Astronomy, Newark, DE 19716, USA
hpetrie@udel.edu
Tyler Blask
University of Delaware, Department of Physics & Astronomy, Newark, DE 19716, USA
tvblask@udel.edu
Easton J. Honaker
Abstract
The Vera C. Rubin Observatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) promises to drastically accelerate the discovery of ultracool dwarfs (UCDs) over the course of its 10-year survey of the Southern Hemisphere. With the official start of LSST imminent, we showcase LSST’s capabilities for discovering and characterizing UCDs using early commissioning data (Data Preview 1). The LSST photometric system at this stage remains poorly understood for faint UCDs. Thus, we begin by cross-matching Data Preview 1 against known UCD catalogs. We recover 1 known UCD from the Ultracool Sheet, 17 UCDs from the Dark Energy Survey, and 17 low mass stars from the Gaia Catalog of Nearby Stars. Using these known UCDs alongside recent spectroscopically-confirmed Euclid objects, we select 89 ultracool dwarf candidates in LSST fields, 17 of which are unique to this work. We present our candidates, a photometric temperature estimate, and discuss lessons learned from using early LSST data products. Finally, we turn to the future and predict potential UCD counts in upcoming LSST commissioning data (Data Preview 2), which is expected to be available to the Rubin community in 2026. Using synthetic populations of brown dwarfs, we forecast over 17,000 objects may be discovered and characterized in Data Preview 2. We predict that several hundred known objects and thousands of as-of-yet undiscovered UCDs may be detected in Data Preview 2 fields.
Sky surveys (1464); Brown dwarfs (185); Low mass stars (2050); Multi-color photometry (1077); Catalogs (205)
†
†
facilities:
Rubin:Simonyi (LSSTComCam), Gaia, Euclid
†
†
software:
Astropy
(Astropy Collaboration et al.,
2013
,
2018
,
2022
)
,
TOPCAT
(M. B. Taylor,
2005
)
,
Matplotlib
(J. D. Hunter,
2007
)
,
NumPy
(C. R. Harris et al.,
2020
)
,
SPLAT
(A. J. Burgasser & Splat Development Team,
2017
)
,
LSDB
(N. Caplar et al.,
2025
)
show]ehonaker@udel.edu
I
Introduction
The long wait is over: after decades of preparation and anticipation, the Vera C. Rubin Observatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) has arrived. The survey will scan
≥
18
,
000
\geq 18,000
square degrees of the Southern sky over its 10 year timeline, revealing the “greatest cosmic movie” ever made of over 17 billion stars and 20 billion galaxies
(Ž. Ivezić et al.,
2019
)
. LSST will exceed previous optical survey depths by several magnitudes, capture millions of temporal variations, and reach millimag and milliarcsecond photometric and astrometric precisions, respectively. Science cases from all corners of the astronomical community will benefit from the images and catalogs Rubin Observatory will deliver.
The proper LSST survey is scheduled to begin mid 2026, with the transient “Alert stream”
(L. P. Guy et al.,
2025
)
already started on February 24, 2026. The survey design and observation scheduling was created to enable as many scientific use cases as possible while also maximizing synergy with other contemporary observatories
(F. B. Bianco et al.,
2022
)
.
Rubin Observatory released its commissioning data as Data Preview 1 (DP1), in July 2025
(NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory Team et al.,
2025
)
. This commissioning data provided the first opportunity for users to understand the LSST data processing pipelines and products. Already, recent studies showcase LSST’s potential across many fields of astronomy (e.g.
J. L. Carlin et al.
2025
; C. O. Chandler et al.
2025
; Y. Choi et al.
2025
; G. Cordoni et al.
2025
; A. J. Romanowsky et al.
2025
; Y. Wang et al.
2025
; S. Greenstreet et al.
2026
). In this work, we focus on our coolest neighbors and how LSST can contribute.
Ultracool dwarfs (UCDs,
J. D. Kirkpatrick
2005
) are objects with effective temperatures
T
eff
≤
3
,
000
T_{\text{eff}}\leq 3,000
K; this category contains both very-low-mass stars (mid- to late-M dwarfs) as well as brown dwarfs (L, T, and Y dwarfs).
1
1
1
While UCD is a larger umbrella term and refers to more than just brown dwarfs, for the purposes of this paper the terms are used interchangeably except for cases specifically referring to the exclusion or inclusion of M dwarfs.
UCDs are intrinsically faint objects (
<
10
−
4
​
L
⊙
<10^{-4}L_{\odot}
,
A. Burrows et al.
2001
) that emit the majority of their flux in the infrared. As such, the majority of known UCDs, specifically brown dwarfs, are found in the closest portion of the Milky Way, our Solar Neighborhood (
d
≲
200
d\lesssim 200
pc).
Brown dwarfs are substellar objects below the hydrogen fusing mass limit that perpetually cool over their lifetime
(S. S. Kumar,
1962
)
. The transitions from warmer M spectral types (
T
eff
>
2
,
400
T_{\text{eff}}>2,400
K) to L types (
T
eff
≈
2
,
400
T_{\text{eff}}\approx 2,400
K to
1
,
400
1,400
K) is marked by the weakening of optical TiO bands from dust condensation, significant H
2
O absorption features shaping the objects’ spectra, and photometric reddening
(H. R. A. Jones & T. Tsuji,
1997
; J. D. Kirkpatrick et al.,
1999
; E. L. Martín et al.,
1999
)
. Once objects cool to
∼
1
,
200
−
1
,
400
\sim 1,200-1,400
K, they reach the L/T transition, where the dusty clouds sink deeper into the atmosphere, resulting in a clearing of optical depth and bluer photometric colors
(D. Saumon & M. S. Marley,
2008
)
. The exact mechanisms and timescales associated with this transition from cloudy to cloudless atmospheres is an open research question with ongoing modeling work. The impact of a large sample of objects at the L/T transition from LSST on this research cannot be overstated. LSST will constrain the brown dwarf luminosity function at the L/T transition and extend recent work on the local mass and luminosity functions
(J. D. Kirkpatrick et al.,
2024
)
. Lastly, as objects cool further to the T/Y transition (
T
eff
≲
600
T_{\text{eff}}\lesssim 600
K), icy water clouds dominate their spectra and disequilibrium chemistry becomes critical
(C. V. Morley et al.,
2014
)
. Since LSST is an optical instrument, it will likely be unable to detect objects at the T/Y transition, unless they are exceptionally nearby. Nevertheless, LSST’s photometric capabilities promise to reveal a myriad of M, L, and early T dwarfs. As LSST progresses, one will be able to assemble an unprecedentedly large sample of brown dwarfs to answer some of the field’s biggest questions with statistical confidence.
The appeal of studying UCDs with LSST extends beyond just the brown dwarf community. Since brown dwarfs cannot support hydrogen fusion, they retain the metallicity information from their formation site, making them excellent probes of galactic archaeology and evolution
(B. Rojas-Ayala et al.,
2012
; R. E. Ryan et al.,
2017
; E. L. Martín et al.,
2018
; C. Aganze et al.,
2022
)
. Similarly, these objects have high proper motions and their kinematics can be used to study Galactic structure and dynamical heating
(J. K. Faherty et al.,
2009
; T. J. Dupuy & M. C. Liu,
2017
; W. M. J. Best et al.,
2024
)
. Many brown dwarfs share similar temperatures and atmospheric chemistry with exoplanets, allowing for the study of exoplanet-analogous atmospheres without contamination from a host star
(J. K. Faherty et al.,
2016
)
. For the extragalactic community, a better understanding of UCD selection techniques can enhance their sample purity since ultracool dwarfs’ red photometric colors are common contaminants in high redshift quasar samples and easily confused for little red dot galaxies
(K. N. Hainline et al.,
2024
; H. B. Akins et al.,
2025
; K. N. Hainline et al.,
2025
)
. LSST’s multi-band temporal coverage and alert stream can also aid variability and flare studies and trigger follow-up observations
(J. E. Gizis et al.,
2013
; S. J. Schmidt et al.,
2016
)
. The expected astrometric performance of LSST, with a sufficient baseline, can act as an extension of the Gaia mission for faint objects, enabling proper motion and astrometric binary studies
(LSST Science Collaboration et al.,
2009
)
.
All of these science cases begin with the detection, identification, and characterization of UCDs. Historically, the discovery of UCDs has been driven by wide-area photometric sky surveys like the Two Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS,
M. F. Skrutskie et al.
2006
; J. D. Kirkpatrick et al.
1999
; J. E. Gizis et al.
2000
), Pan-STARRS1 (PS1,
K. C. Chambers et al.
2016
; N. R. Deacon et al.
2014
; W. M. J. Best et al.
2018a
), the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE,
E. L. Wright et al.
2010
; M. C. Cushing et al.
2011
; J. D. Kirkpatrick et al.
2011
), and the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS,
D. G. York et al.
2000
; A. A. West et al.
2004
). The next generation of instruments and surveys, LSST, Euclid
(Euclid Collaboration et al.,
2025
)
, JWST
(J. P. Gardner et al.,
2006
)
, SphereX
(J. J. Bock et al.,
2026
)
, and Roman
(R. Akeson et al.,
2019
)
have already (or soon will) begin to scan the skies.
Many of the science cases previously mentioned strongly benefit from spectroscopic follow-up. JWST is exceptionally good at spectral characterization of UCDs and has revolutionized our understanding of the coldest T and Y dwarf atmospheres (e.g.
S. A. Beiler et al.
2023
; K. L. Luhman et al.
2024
; A. J. Burgasser et al.
2024
; D. C. Bardalez Gagliuffi et al.
2025
) as well as the atmospheric structures in warmer L dwarfs (e.g.
J. M. Vos et al.
2023
; E. Manjavacas et al.
2024
; C. L. Phillips et al.
2024
; P. Patapis et al.
2025
). JWST is the premier follow-up tool but is best suited to pencil-beam type surveys, not the wide field surveys that discover the majority of UCDs. Follow-up targets are required to have precise parallaxes and proper motions; cases with substandard astrometry can lead to missed targets and failed observations, making accurate measurements from larger photometric surveys is imperative. The actual discovery and identification of objects that are well-suited for follow-up must come from LSST, Euclid, and Roman. LSST uniquely offers optical wavelength and temporal coverage of the Southern sky with hundreds of observations of every patch of sky over the course of the 10-year survey.
This paper presents a showcase of LSST’s early data products and their capabilities to enable the discovery of UCDs. We divide our exploration into sections aligned with the past, present, and future. First, we describe Data Preview 1 in Section
II
. In Section
III
, we explore previously known UCDs and their properties within LSST DP1. Next, we consider the present state of UCD searches in Section
IV
by selecting UCD candidates using traditional color cut methods. In Section
V
we look to future LSST data products and predict UCD counts and highlight key considerations to fully utilize LSST’s capabilities. Lastly, we summarize our conclusions in Section
VI
.
II
LSST Data Preview 1
In July 2025, the Rubin observatory released its first set of commissioning data as Data Preview 1 (DP1,
NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory Team et al.
2025
), giving the Rubin community its first look at on-sky LSST data products. DP1 included processed images and catalogs of seven
∼
1
\sim 1
square degree fields with varying filter combinations and depths observed using the LSST commissioning camera, LSSTComCam. In DP1, outputs from source extraction run on individual exposures, known as visits, are collected in the Source tables
(NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory,
2025a
)
, which are band-specific and ideal for transient objects. For static science cases, detected objects from deep, coadded images are reported in the Object table
(NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory,
2025b
)
. Entries in the Object table are detections above a signal-to-noise ratio of 5 in at least one coadded band and are a collection of astrometric and photometric measurements over many visits. Unique to the Object table, some measurements, such as the object position and extendedness, are available for each band individually but also for the “reference band” used by the coaddition pipelines. The reference band is determined by detection significance for a source and preferentially adopted in
i
,
r
,
z
,
y
,
g
,
u
i,r,z,y,g,u
order. Measurements on other bands, such as
*_psfMag
or morphology calculations, are therefore generally forced measurements at positions determined by the reference band. A more in depth discussion of the Object catalog and the pipelines that produce it can be found in
Rubin Observatory Science Pipelines Developers (
2025
)
. Since DP1 includes both Object and Source tables based on deep coadds and individual images, respectively, we will mirror this nomenclature by referring to entries in the Object table as objects and entries in the Sources table as sources. In this work, we exclusively use the Object table and access all DP1 data products through the Rubin Science Platform (RSP).
2
2
2
https://data.lsst.cloud/
One of the first challenges with new observatories is characterizing the photometric system and data products. We begin by searching for known UCDs within DP1. We focus our efforts on four of the seven fields: Extended Chandra Deep Field South (ECDFS,
α
,
δ
\alpha,\delta
:
53.13
,
−
28.10
53.13,-28.10
), Euclid Deep Field South (EDFS,
α
,
δ
\alpha,\delta
:
59.10
,
−
48.73
59.10,-48.73
), Low Ecliptic Latitude field (LEL,
α
,
δ
\alpha,\delta
:
37.86
,
6.98
37.86,6.98
), and Low Galactic Latitude field (LGL,
α
,
δ
\alpha,\delta
:
95.00
,
−
25.00
95.00,-25.00
). We do not prioritize the remaining three fields because the 47 Tuc Globular Cluster field lacks
z
z
band photometry and significant crowding limits the LSST analysis pipelines, the Fornax Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxy observations contains no
z
z
or
y
y
band photometry, and, lastly, the Seagull Nebula field observations are significantly shallower than all other fields and include no
i
i
or
y
y
band photometry.
III
Known UCDs in DP1
We cross-match DP1 with other surveys’ counterparts using the Object table
(NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory,
2025b
)
. We use photometry in the
r
r
,
i
i
,
z
z
, and
y
y
band (as available, LEL lacks
y
y
band photometry), avoiding
u
u
and
g
g
bands. We primarily avoid
u
u
band since UCDs emit very limited flux at such short wavelengths. The LSSTComCam CCDs (used to generate DP1) have a known red leak in the
g
g
band filter range, leading to unphysically bright
g
g
magnitudes for cooler objects.
3
3
3
For a detailed discussion on the
g
g
band red leak, see SITCOMTN-152
(E. K. Urbach et al.,
2025
)
.
As such, we also avoid using the
g
g
band in DP1. The red leak is unique to LSSTComCam and is not expected to occur with the actual survey camera, LSSTCam, in future data releases.
III.1
The Ultracool Sheet
We first search for known UCDs from the Ultracool Sheet
(W. M. J. Best et al.,
2025
)
in all six DP1 fields. Only one object, ULAS J023144.49+063602.2 (hereafter ULAS J0231+0636, phototype T2.8,
C. V. Cardoso et al.
2015
), falls within any of the DP1 regions. We identify it as LSST-DP1-O-648364758310848043 in the LEL field,
4.2
​
″
4.2$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolArcsecond}$
away from its J2000 position in the Ultracool sheet. ULAS J0231+0636 was discovered using methane imaging by
C. V. Cardoso et al. (
2015
)
and was previously included in UKIDSS-DR8
(A. Lawrence et al.,
2012
)
and later in CatWISE2020
(F. Marocco et al.,
2021
)
. With
Y
MKO
=
20.07
±
0.18
Y_{\text{MKO}}=20.07\pm 0.18
(A. Lawrence et al.,
2012
)
and
J
MKO
=
18.98
±
0.11
J_{\text{MKO}}=18.98\pm 0.11
(C. V. Cardoso et al.,
2015
)
, ULAS J0231+0636 falls well below Gaia’s sensitivity limit; additionally, ULAS J0231+0636 is not within the Dark Energy Survey’s footprint. This detection by LSST is, to the best of our knowledge, the first optical observation of ULAS J0231+0636.
III.2
Dark Energy Survey
In the Dark Energy Survey’s Data Release 2 (DES DR2),
M. dal Ponte et al. (
2023
)
identified 19,583 UCD candidates across the 5,000 deg
2
footprint using phototype and template matching techniques. The DES footprint overlaps three of the
∼
\sim
1 square degree LSST DP1 fields: ECDFS, EDFS, and Fornax. We search for counterparts to their candidates in LSST using a
5
​
″
5$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolArcsecond}$
search radius and recovered 17 of the DES candidates (7 in ECDFS, 5 in EDFS, and 5 in Fornax). For each unique DES candidate, we visually inspected cross-matched LSST objects to determine the single best LSST counterpart. In all cases, the best counterpart was also the closest cross-match; the mean separation between the DES candidate positions and their LSST counterparts is
0.175
​
″
±
0.150
​
″
0.175$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolArcsecond}$\pm 0.150$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolArcsecond}$
. The majority of offsets are smaller than the instruments’ respective pixel scales (LSSTComCam:
0.2
0.2
″/px, DECam:
0.2637
0.2637
″/px). We list the 17 pairings’ DES coadd identifiers, LSST DP1 Object table identifiers, and their positional offsets in Table
1
. Of the 12 objects that are in the ECDFS and EDFS fields, we show 10 of their positions in a color-color diagram in Figure
1
. The remaining two are only detected in one of the three
i
,
z
,
y
i,z,y
bands and we cannot construct the relevant colors. Objects in the Fornax field lack
z
,
y
z,y
photometry and in most cases are too faint to create reliable colors using
u
,
g
,
r
u,g,r
. Thus, they are not included in Figure
1
. For the 10 objects shown, the mean differences in their
i
,
z
,
y
i,z,y
band magnitudes (LSST - DES) and associated standard deviation are
Δ
​
i
=
0.475
±
0.410
\Delta i=0.475\pm 0.410
mag,
Δ
​
z
=
0.498
±
0.042
\Delta z=0.498\pm 0.042
mag, and
Δ
​
y
=
0.074
±
0.076
\Delta y=0.074\pm 0.076
mag.
4
4
4
Both DES and LSST use AB magnitudes. The respective
i
,
z
,
y
i,z,y
bandpasses are similar but not identical in transmission.
The
i
i
band differences are skewed by the red outlier LSST-O-DP1-592912676070375482 (also further discussed in Section
IV.2
). Removing this object reduces the magnitude offset in the
i
i
band to
Δ
​
i
=
0.386
±
0.252
\Delta i=0.386\pm 0.252
mag. In Section
IV.2
, we select UCD candidates in the ECDFS and EDFS fields. All 10 DES candidates in the ECDFS and EDFS fields with multi-band detections make our final candidate selections.
For the 10 DES objects in the ECDFS and EDFS fields with
i
,
z
,
y
i,z,y
-based colors, we can validate the phototypes from
M. dal Ponte et al. (
2023
)
using Euclid spectra. All 10 objects are phototyped as either L0 or L1 dwarfs. We retrieve all 10 objects’ spectra by submitting TAP queries through the IRSA Euclid archives. For each retrieved spectrum, we discard flux bins where mask values are odd or values
≥
64
\geq 64
, retaining only Euclid-recommended points and then computed the median signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) from
1.3
1.3
μ
\mu
m to
1.8
1.8
μ
\mu
m. Nine of the ten retrieved spectra have SNR
>
3
>3
; we remove the one spectrum below our threshold (LSST-DP1-O-611255691117613253) from our analysis. We spectral type each of the remaining nine spectra using the SPLAT software package
(A. J. Burgasser & Splat Development Team,
2017
)
and the infrared standards within via
χ
2
\chi^{2}
minimization. For each object, we compare first to standard dwarf templates and then to youth and subdwarf templates to find the lowest
χ
2
\chi^{2}
result before visually inspecting all final results. The resulting best fits are shown in the side panels of Figure
1
for each object.
We now briefly discuss the resulting spectral types for the 9 DES-LSST counterparts. Four of the nine objects are best fit by standard dwarf templates, three by lower metallicity dwarf/subdwarf templates, and the remaining two by low-gravity templates. In all cases, resulting spectral types range from M8 to L2. We note that the Euclid spectra only extend from
1.2
−
1.8
1.2-1.8
μ
\mu
m, which contains the entire
H
H
band region but only part of the
J
J
band and none of the
Y
Y
or
K
K
band sections of an object’s spectral energy distribution (SED). For late-M and early-L dwarfs, the
0.9
−
1.4
0.9-1.4
μ
\mu
m region is critical to spectral typing
(J. D. Kirkpatrick et al.,
2010
)
. While we can broadly determine the best spectral type from the available Euclid spectra, more complete coverage is necessary to confirm these objects’ nature. For example, while a triangular
H
H
band shape is a diagnostic for young, low-gravity objects, a more complete spectrum that allows for the calculation of gravity-sensitive indices from
K. N. Allers & M. C. Liu (
2013
)
is necessary to confirm LSST-DP1-O-609788736447728584 and LSST-DP1-O-592912676070361415 as young, low-gravity objects. We note that LSST-DP1-O-591818455842308307 (Panel F), is best fit by the L2 standard Kelu-1, but has additional flux from
1.55
−
1.65
1.55-1.65
μ
\mu
m. We attempted to fit this object using low-gravity, subdwarf, and binary templates but no single object or combined binary template offers substantial improvement in fitting statistics or visually fits better than the L2 standard. As such, we note this object may benefit from additional follow-up observations to understand the flux excess.
Table 1:
DES and LSST UCD counterparts
DES Coadd Id
LSST objectId
Offset
LSST-DP1-O-
(arcsec)
1328918880
605447177346486023
0.112
1328887428
605447864541253066
0.040
1328887563
605447795821799979
0.210
1329176716
604070726227491372
0.364
1329107252
604071344702753879
0.002
1389041770
611256653190268598
0.053
1394561870
611255691117613253
0.191
1394602941
611254316728070277
0.076
1395307524
611254316728068170
0.185
1395334859
609788736447723739
0.067
1395327167
609788736447728584
0.144
1399577467
611253492094352857
0.144
1425205963
592912676070375482
0.151
1425208507
592912676070361415
0.376
1431403950
591818455842308307
0.162
1431388259
592912538631424679
0.626
1432755994
592914531496244254
0.076
Note. — Listed cross-matches are ordered by LSST RA. The first 5 entries are in the DP1 Fornax field, the following 7 are in ECDFS, and the final 5 are in EDFS.
Figure 1:
The DES candidates with LSST counterparts are shown in red against LSST point sources in the upper left panel on a LSST color-color plot. For the nine cross-matched counterparts with full
i
,
z
,
y
i,z,y
coverage and Euclid spectra with median
SNR
>
3
\textrm{SNR}>3
, we display each spectrum in black with the best-fitting spectral standard in yellow. LSST-matched candidates and their spectra are paired using labels A-I.
III.3
Gaia Catalog of Nearby Stars
In addition to UCDs from the Ultracool Sheet and the DES DR2 candidate lists, we search for known UCDs from the Gaia DR2 catalog of UCDs
(R. L. Smart et al.,
2017
)
. However, none of the 321 Gaia DR2 UCDs overlapped the four DP1 regions of interest (ECDFS, EDFS, LEL, LGL). We extended our search to include known low mass objects from the Gaia EDR3 Catalog of Nearby Stars (GCNS,
Gaia Collaboration et al.
2021
). The GCNS is comprised of vetted objects within 100 pc and includes main sequence stars as well as a few UCDs. However, UCDs are generally too faint to be detected with Gaia making the GCNS incomplete for these spectral types.
From the GCNS, we propagated positions from the epoch 2016.0 coordinates in Gaia EDR3 to an average visit epoch of 2025.0 for DP1 using all available Gaia proper motion, parallax, and radial velocity information. Using TOPCAT, we cross-matched the propagated positions of all GCNS objects within 1.25
°
\degree
of the DP1 field centers with the LSST Object catalog. Since the Object catalog is an averaged position over many images in multiple bands per object, we cross-matched using a
3
​
″
3$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolArcsecond}$
search radius to account for astrometric precision and coaddition averaging differences. We also cross-matched using a
5
​
″
5$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolArcsecond}$
radius but found little to no improvement over the
3
​
″
3$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolArcsecond}$
radius.
In total, we found potential cross-matches for 40 of the GCNS objects: 19 GCNS objects in LEL, 9 in ECDFS, 6 in LGL, and 6 in EDFS. Using the GCNS objects’ absolute Gaia
G
G
magnitude,
B
​
P
−
R
​
P
BP-RP
color, and Gaia reported temperature (as available), we approximated broad spectral types for the 40 objects. In the sample, there are 1 F-type star, 1 G-type star, 7 K-type stars, 28 M dwarfs, and 3 white dwarfs. Based on absolute
G
G
and
R
​
P
RP
relations from
R. L. Smart et al. (
2019
)
, all M dwarfs are warmer than M8.
These 40 GCNS objects matched to 134 LSST objects; visual inspection revealed that 18 GCNS objects had reliable 1:1 matches, but the remaining 22 GCNS objects were each matched to three or more LSST objects. All objects with clean LSST matches were M dwarfs or white dwarfs while nearly all objects with more than 3 potential LSST counterparts were K or earlier spectral types. Further reviewing the matches reveals that for nearby, early-type objects, namely G, K, and early M dwarfs, the objects are saturated in LSST.
5
5
5
From the LSST Science book
(LSST Science Collaboration et al.,
2009
)
, a 15 second exposure with
0.7
​
″
0.7$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolArcsecond}$
seeing will saturate at
u
,
g
,
r
,
i
,
z
,
y
u,g,r,i,z,y
=
14.7
,
15.7
,
15.8
,
15.8
,
15.3
,
14.7,15.7,15.8,15.8,15.3,
and
13.9
13.9
mag, respectively.
In the current LSST processing pipelines, nearby saturated stars cover a large enough angular size to be detected as an extended object, deblended into multiple peaks, and ultimately cataloged as several “child” objects. These reported “children” from the deblending processing appear throughout the wings and center of saturated objects but cannot provide a single definitive position or magnitude measurement for the original, saturated source. In fact, these saturation artifacts are color outliers that can easily be confused with extreme-color objects and contaminate color-color selection of UCDs. In DP1, there is no current flag system in place to warn that such deblending artifacts are near a known bright Gaia source. Similarly, there currently is no mechanism to perform astrometric or photometric measurements on the original saturated sources within the LSST pipelines. It may be possible to reconstruct the saturated object’s LSST position using its deblended children, but that is beyond the scope of this work. We conclude that studies interested in low mass stars should focus on objects beyond the GCNS 100 pc limit to avoid this issue.
Figure 2:
Cross-matched GCNS and LSST DP1 objects are shown on top of the entire GCNS (gray dots) on a Gaia
M
G
M_{G}
vs
B
​
P
−
R
​
P
BP-RP
color-magnitude diagram. GCNS objects with LSST cross-matches are color-coded by distance. Triangles denote LSST saturated objects whereas circles represent resolved LSST counterparts. Nearly all low mass main sequence objects with
M
G
<
12.0
M_{G}<12.0
within 100 pc become saturated in LSST.
For the 18 GCNS objects that did not saturate in the LSST exposures, we tabulate their LSST astrometry and photometry in Table
2
. The remaining saturated objects are also listed in Table
2
, but lack LSST-specific information. Positions in Table
2
are from LSST for non-saturated matches and from Gaia EDR3 for saturated sources. In Figure
2
we show the positions of all 40 objects on a Gaia color-magnitude diagram with points color-coded by distance. Most GCNS objects lie
60
−
100
60-100
pc away while three objects are between
35
−
60
35-60
pc. Saturation is a result of both distance and spectral type. Objects with
M
G
≥
12.0
M_{G}\geq 12.0
are generally unsaturated within 100 pc whereas all objects with
M
G
<
12.0
M_{G}<12.0
are saturated in DP1. To further investigate saturation limits, we performed synthetic photometry on BT-SETTL models
(F. Allard et al.,
2012
)
to estimate how far an object must be to avoid saturating in LSST. We use 6,000 K, 5,000 K, and 4,000 K models to model F, G, and K stars, respectively. Assuming the objects first saturate the shallowest band, the
y
y
band, we compute a limiting distance by translating LSSTComCam
g
g
,
r
r
, and
i
i
band synthetic photometry to Gaia
G
G
,
B
​
P
BP
, and
R
​
P
RP
using DP1 photometric conversions
(M. N. Porter et al.,
2025
)
. Then, we assume an absolute Gaia
G
G
magnitude of
M
G
=
4.0
,
6.0
,
7.5
M_{G}=4.0,6.0,7.5
for the F, G, and K star models, respectively. We select these values as broad approximations for a large span of metallicities and temperature ranges within each spectral type. As such, our final distance estimates should be viewed as a first-order estimate. We find that F stars will likely saturate out to
∼
\sim
1 kpc, G stars to
∼
600
\sim 600
pc, and K stars to
∼
400
\sim 400
pc.
Table 2:
Astrometry and Photometry of Gaia Catalog of Nearby Stars and LSST DP1 Cross-matches
Column Label
Description
Example
Units
GaiaEDR3
Gaia EDR3 identifier
4830033050425668608
…
objectId
LSST DP1 identifier (LSST-DP1-O-)
592914119179382261
…
RA
LSST RA if unsaturated, Gaia EDR3 RA if saturated
58.40687550
58.40687550
deg
RA_Err
Uncertainty of RA
0.00000019
0.00000019
deg
DEC
LSST DEC if unsaturated, Gaia EDR3 DEC if saturated
−
48.78568358
-48.78568358
deg
DEC_Err
Uncertainty of DEC
0.00000029
0.00000029
deg
Plx
Gaia EDR3 parallax
9.76
9.76
mas
Plx_Err
Uncertainty of Gaia EDR3 parallax
0.30
0.30
mas
PMRA
Gaia EDR3 RA proper motion (
μ
α
\mu_{\alpha}
)
56.40
56.40
mas/yr
PMRA_Err
Uncertainty of Gaia EDR3 RA proper motion (
μ
α
\mu_{\alpha}
)
0.31
0.31
mas/yr
PMDEC
Gaia EDR3 DEC Proper Motion (
μ
δ
\mu_{\delta}
)
0.51
0.51
mas/yr
PMDEC_Err
Uncertainty of Gaia EDR3 DEC proper motion (
μ
δ
\mu_{\delta}
)
0.36
0.36
mas/yr
Gmag
Gaia
G
G
magnitude
19.576
mag
Gmag_Err
Uncertainty of Gaia
G
G
magnitude
0.005
mag
BPmag
Gaia
B
​
P
BP
magnitude
21.143
mag
BPmag_Err
Uncertainty of Gaia
B
​
P
BP
magnitude
0.178
mag
RPmag
Gaia
R
​
P
RP
magnitude
18.066
mag
RPmag_Err
Uncertainty of Gaia
R
​
P
RP
magnitude
0.024
mag
rmag
LSST
r
r
magnitude
21.415
mag
rmag_Err
Uncertainty of LSST
r
r
magnitude
0.005
mag
imag
LSST
i
i
magnitude
18.917
mag
imag_Err
Uncertainty of LSST
i
i
magnitude
0.002
mag
zmag
LSST
z
z
magnitude
17.74
mag
zmag_Err
Uncertainty of LSST
z
z
magnitude
0.001
mag
ymag
LSST
y
y
magnitude
17.041
mag
ymag_Err
Uncertainty of LSST
y
y
magnitude
0.001
mag
Saturated
Is the GCNS object saturated in LSST?
No
…
SPT
Spectral type estimate (from this work)
M
…
Note. — The complete table is available in a machine-readable format in the online journal.
IV
UCD Candidates from DP1
We search for brown dwarf candidates in the two DP1 fields with Euclid overlap using traditional color-color selection cuts. In the following subsections we describe our selection criteria and the resulting UCD candidates.
Figure 3:
Number of objects as a function of LSST
z
z
band magnitude that pass subsequent selection criteria. Starting from the 260,311 LSST and Euclid cross-matched objects, each selection criteria filter is shown with the remaining fraction of objects shown in the legend. The combination of all criteria retains 89 objects. The strictest criteria is the color-color selection region based off of Euclid-confirmed UCDs in
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
and recovered DES UCD candidates from
M. dal Ponte et al. (
2023
)
.
IV.1
LSST DP1 Data and Filtering
Of the seven DP1 fields, two overlap with the Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1): ECDFS and EDFS. For each of these fields, we query the DP1 Object table through the RSP for objects within 1.25
°
\degree
from the field centers. We retrieved columns related to PSF photometry, position, extendedness, and pixel flags. The LSST DP1 Object table and Euclid Q1 MER Catalog were cross-matched by LSDB
6
6
6
https://lsdb.io/
(N. Caplar et al.,
2025
; K. Malanchev et al.,
2025
)
, linking LSST’s
objectId
to Euclid’s
object_id
. We retain objects with Euclid counterparts and query the Euclid MER catalog via TAP to retrieve object positions, detection quality flags, fluxes, and morphology measurements. Specifically, we query for the
flux_*_2fwhm_aper
fluxes as recommended in
A. Mohandasan et al. (
2025
)
and calculate AB magnitudes as described in the MER photometry cookbook
7
7
7
https://euclid.esac.esa.int/dr/q1/dpdd/merdpd/merphotometrycookbook.html
for Euclid’s visible (
I
E
I_{E}
) and near infrared (
Y
E
Y_{E}
,
J
E
J_{E}
,
H
E
H_{E}
) bands. To avoid confusion, Euclid bandpasses will be denoted using uppercase letters with the subscript
E
E
(
I
E
,
Y
E
,
J
E
,
H
E
I_{E},Y_{E},J_{E},H_{E}
) while LSST bandpasses will be written in lowercase (
u
,
g
,
r
,
i
,
z
,
y
u,g,r,i,z,y
).
Across the ECDFS and EDFS fields, there are 260,311 LSST objects with a paired Euclid counterpart. Both fields have similar extinction values and no reason to suggest different selection criteria by field would be necessary. To arrive at our final selection of 89 UCD candidates (44 in ECDFS, 45 in EDFS), we apply a series of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), quality, and color cuts, each explained in the follow subsections. The impact of each of these selection cuts on the dataset is visualized in Figure
3
.
IV.1.1
Detection Quality Criteria
The first selection criteria used LSST photometric quality flags to exclude objects with saturated pixels, detections near image edges, or general failures with PSF measurements. Specifically, we removed any objects with
*_pixelFlag_saturated
,
*_pixelFlag_saturatedCenter
,
*_psfFlux_flag_edge
, or
*_psfFlux_flag
set to True in any of the
i
,
z
i,z
, or
y
y
bands. The saturation flags allow us to remove any objects that would later be selected by color-color cuts but are actually artifacts created in the deblending process for saturated stars as discussed in Section
III.3
. We do not include the
detect_isIsolated
flag in our detection quality criteria, as done in
Z. Zhang & Y. Li (
2025
)
, since many potential candidates are near other objects and are listed as products of the deblender even without overlapping pixels. Using the
detect_isIsolated
flag would remove
>
90
%
>90\%
of objects that would meet all of our other selection criteria, including many potential UCDs, simply by being deblended. The detection quality flag criteria removes 5,564 of the original 260,311 objects (98% remaining).
IV.1.2
SNR Criteria
We then implement signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) requirements in
i
,
z
,
y
i,z,y
to only retain well-measured objects that allow for the construction of optical colors. Since the
z
z
band is the deepest band of the three in DP1, we required
SNR
z
≥
5
\text{SNR}_{z}\geq 5
and allowed a less strict
SNR
i
,
y
≥
3
\text{SNR}_{i,y}\geq 3
in the
i
,
y
i,y
bands. We considered requiring
SNR
r
≥
3
\text{SNR}_{r}\geq 3
, but ultimately found imposing restrictions on the
r
r
band yielded candidate lists that were exclusively M dwarfs. Our analysis in this work centers around
i
,
z
,
y
i,z,y
and we leave further investigation of the
g
,
r
g,r
bands for later data products with LSSTCam instead of LSSTComCam.
We also require that objects have
SNR
I
E
,
Y
E
,
J
E
,
H
E
≥
3
\text{SNR}_{I_{E},Y_{E},J_{E},H_{E}}\geq 3
. These requirements are more liberal than those implemented in
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
, but the addition of optical SNR criteria still yields well-measured candidates. It is worth noting that the Euclid
I
E
I_{E}
bandpass is a wide filter that spans wavelengths from the red cutoff of the LSST
g
g
band to the blue cutoff of the LSST
y
y
band. Utilizing both bands, despite overlap, and building both LSST- and Euclid-based optical colors allows for greater characterization of the optical portion of the UCDs’ SEDs. We further explore colors with overlapping bandpasses in Section
IV.1.4
.
We validated our SNR criteria with infrared-selected UCD candidates from
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
. 17 of their C1 class objects (candidates with confirmed UCD spectral features and matches to UCD standards) were matched to LSST counterparts by LSDB and all 17 significantly surpass
SNR
i
,
z
,
y
≥
5
\mathrm{SNR}_{i,z,y}\geq 5
. The joint optical and infrared SNR criteria remove 174,087 of the original 260,311 objects (33% remaining). 84,929 (32%) objects meet both SNR and detection quality requirements.
Figure 4:
Extendedness in the LSST Object table parameters. Euclid objects meeting point-like criteria from
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
are shown in magenta against all DP1 objects in black. The upper panel shows how LSST’s flux ratio (
z_psfFlux
/
/
z_cModelFlux
, see Section
IV.1.3
for details)
vs
the
z_sizeExtendedness
parameter. The lines represent the LSST pipeline cuts: above the solid red line (
z_psfFlux
/
/
z_cModelFlux
=
0.95
=0.95
), objects are classified as point-like in LSST.
z_sizeExtendedness
is a moments-based approach where greater values indicate larger degrees of extendedness. As shown in the lower panel (
z_psfFlux
/
/
z_cModelFlux
vs
z_psfMag
), a significant number of faint point sources (
z
>
22
z>22
) drop below the 0.95 flux ratio threshold. Our final extendedness criteria includes all objects with
z_psfFlux
/
/
z_cModelFlux
>
0.95
\texttt{z\_cModelFlux}>0.95
or
z_psfFlux
/
z_cModelFlux
>
0.85
\texttt{z\_cModelFlux}>0.85
and
z_sizeExtendedness
<
0.4
\texttt{z\_sizeExtendedness}<0.4
(dotted red lines).
IV.1.3
Extendedness Criteria
Next, we remove any extended objects. The LSST Object table includes an extendedness flag for each band (
*_extendedness
) and for the reference band (
*_refExtendedness
). The extendedness parameter is a ratio of an object’s PSF flux and CModel flux in a given band, where the CModel flux is a galaxy-oriented photometric measurement that linearly combines multiple PSF-convolved ellipses. The LSST science pipelines compute the ratio of PSF to Cmodel flux and assign an object to be point-like (
*_refExtendedness
==0) if
*_psfFlux
/
*_cModelFlux
≥
0.95
\texttt{*\_psfFlux}/\texttt{*\_cModelFlux}\geq 0.95
. However, for faint point sources at lower SNR, the CModel flux measurement can become unreliable and the extendedness parameter in different bands does not always agree. For UCD selection purposes, a more reliable star/galaxy separation metric is necessary.
To design a more robust approach for faint UCDs, we investigated how objects that meet Euclid point source requirements in
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
were classified by the LSST pipelines. To briefly summarize,
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
filtered point sources by requiring the following combination of morphology cuts:
ELLIPTICITY
<
0.2
<0.2
;
FWHM
<
1.5
′′
<1.5^{\prime\prime}
;
DET_QUALITY_FLAG
≤
3
\leq 3
;
−
3.25
​
mag arcsec
−
2
≤
MUMAX_MINUS_MAG
≤
−
2.65
​
mag arcsec
−
2
-3.25\text{ mag arcsec}^{-2}\leq\texttt{MUMAX\_MINUS\_MAG}\leq-2.65\text{ mag arcsec}^{-2}
; and
SNR
I
E
,
Y
E
,
H
E
>
4
\texttt{SNR${}_{I_{E},Y_{E},H_{E}}$}>4
. In Figure
4
we show the flux ratio and moment-based extendedness values (
*_sizeExtendedness
) for all objects with LSST and Euclid cross-matches and in magenta overlay Euclid-defined point sources. Since the
z
z
band is deeper than the
y
y
band in DP1, we use the
z
z
band extendedness information to classify objects as extended or point-like. The primary extended object locus can be seen at lower flux ratios (
∼
0.75
\sim 0.75
) and higher
z_sizeExtendedness
values whereas the point source locus is centered at high flux ratio values near and above the pipelines’ 0.95 cutoff. Some point sources extend down to a flux ratio of 0.85 and out to
z_sizeExtendedness
∼
\sim
0.4 (dotted red lines in the upper panel of Figure
4
). The lower panel of Figure
4
shows that the vast majority of such objects are found at fainter magnitudes (
z
≳
22
z\gtrsim 22
) and, subsequently, lower SNR. For the purposes of discovering the faintest UCDs, we conclude that a more involved approach to star/galaxy separation is in order; anchored using the
z
z
band, we retain objects that either meet the pipelines’ 0.95 flux ratio cutoff or have both a
*_psfFlux
/
*_cModelFlux
>
0.85
\texttt{*\_psfFlux}/\texttt{*\_cModelFlux}>0.85
(lower dotted red lines in Figure
4
) and
z_sizeExtendedness
<
0.4
<0.4
. The combination of flux and moment-based approaches allows for a more dynamic filtering of faint point sources while avoiding the majority of extended extragalactic objects. The extendedness criteria removes 167,529 of the original 260,311 objects (36% remaining). Combining the detection quality, SNR, and extendedness criteria retains 26,146 (10%) of the original objects.
IV.1.4
Color-Color Criteria
The color-color space occupied by UCDs in LSST is currently largely unverified. While predictions can be made from the similar Pan-STARRS photometric system, the precise color terms between the two types of LSST CCDs or atmospheric water features may lead to significant, unexpected differences between the two systems, particularly in the
y
y
band. The best practice is to use spectroscopically confirmed objects to identify the locus of UCDs in a specific photometric system. As described above, however, at this time, an empirical sample of known and confirmed UCDs within the ECDFS and EDFS footprints is limited. Thus, using the spectroscopically confirmed sample of UCDs from
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
, we aim to find the most effective combination of LSST and Euclid filters to distinguish UCDs from similarly colored background objects, namely extragalactic sources.
For all cross-matched objects, we construct colors using
i
,
z
,
y
,
I
E
,
Y
E
,
J
E
,
H
E
i,z,y,I_{E},Y_{E},J_{E},H_{E}
. We use both Euclid’s visible band,
I
E
I_{E}
, as well as LSST’s three optical bands since the
I
E
I_{E}
band is a much broader bandpass better suited to measuring candidates’ overall optical flux while LSST’s narrower filters can probe specific spectral features over the same wavelengths more precisely (e.g. Na I at 589 nm in
i
i
or K I at 768 nm in
z
z
). Both the Na I and K I features have been historically difficult to reproduce in models
(N. F. Allard et al.,
2003
,
2005
; F. Allard et al.,
2007
; N. F. Allard et al.,
2012
)
, and including Euclid’s
I
E
I_{E}
and LSST’s
i
,
z
i,z
is important to derive color selection criteria that robustly covers the region until larger empirical samples of objects are available.
We also construct colors using both
y
y
and
Y
E
Y_{E}
since they have slightly different bandpasses but significantly different PSFs (
∼
0.6
​
″
\sim 0.6$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolArcsecond}$
for Euclid and
∼
1.2
​
″
\sim 1.2$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolArcsecond}$
for LSST). Furthermore, since Euclid is space-based, we are not concerned with atmospheric transmission effects that may plague the
y
y
band and require additional study in future LSST datasets with LSST’s survey camera, LSSTCam.
We construct a total of 19 colors and determine the range occupied by the C1 and C2 class candidates in
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
. The C2 class candidates are objects with clear UCD-like features but no close matches to any template spectra. We include the C2 class candidates now to assemble a broader sample of objects which may include color outliers, chemically peculiar objects, young objects, low-metallicity subdwarfs, or unresolved binaries.
From the 106 C1 and C2 template objects that are within the ECDFS and EDFS fields, we determine the upper and lower bounds in the color space occupied by the C1 and C2 class objects. For optical colors, we also include the 10 DES cross-matched objects discussed in Section
III.2
. We further extend each color range to the nearest tenth of a magnitude to allow for additional scatter (taking the floor for lower limits and ceiling for upper limits). The final colors and ranges used are shown in Table
3
. While 19 colors is certainly a large number of criteria and redundant, by constructing colors with overlapping bandpasses (
i
,
z
,
y
i,z,y
vs
I
E
I_{E}
and
y
y
vs
Y
E
Y_{E}
) we can build our understanding of LSST colors to reduce the number of constraints in the future.
Table 3:
Color Selection Criteria
Color
Lower Limit
Upper Limit
(mag)
(mag)
LSST only
i
−
z
i-z
0.9
0.9
3.2
3.2
i
−
y
i-y
1.7
1.7
4.1
4.1
z
−
y
z-y
0.4
0.4
1.5
1.5
Euclid only
I
E
−
Y
E
I_{E}-Y_{E}
2.5
2.5
3.5
3.5
I
E
−
J
E
I_{E}-J_{E}
0.6
0.6
3.8
3.8
I
E
−
H
E
I_{E}-H_{E}
2.7
2.7
4.2
4.2
Y
E
−
J
E
Y_{E}-J_{E}
−
2.0
-2.0
0.6
0.6
Y
E
−
H
E
Y_{E}-H_{E}
0.1
0.1
1.0
1.0
J
E
−
H
E
J_{E}-H_{E}
0.0
0.0
2.2
2.2
LSST & Euclid
i
−
Y
E
i-Y_{E}
1.6
1.6
4.5
4.5
i
−
J
E
i-J_{E}
0.5
0.5
4.8
4.8
i
−
H
E
i-H_{E}
2.0
2.0
5.2
5.2
z
−
Y
E
z-Y_{E}
0.4
0.4
1.4
1.4
z
−
J
E
z-J_{E}
−
0.9
-0.9
1.9
1.9
z
−
H
E
z-H_{E}
0.8
0.8
2.3
2.3
I
E
−
y
I_{E}-y
2.2
2.2
3.1
3.1
y
−
Y
E
y-Y_{E}
−
0.5
-0.5
0.5
0.5
y
−
J
E
y-J_{E}
−
0.4
-0.4
1.0
1.0
y
−
H
E
y-H_{E}
−
0.4
-0.4
1.3
1.3
From examining the color space occupied by candidates, we can determine which colors are most and least efficient at UCD selection. For example, as seen in Table
3
, we select UCDs from
−
0.9
≤
(
z
−
J
E
)
≤
1.9
-0.9\leq(z-J_{E})\leq 1.9
. However,
95
%
95\%
of LSST and Euclid cross-matches fall within
−
0.95
≤
(
z
−
J
E
)
≤
2.1
-0.95\leq(z-J_{E})\leq 2.1
, making
z
−
J
E
z-J_{E}
a weaker choice for color selection processes unless coupled with additional colors. Following this logic, the best colors, where the candidate selection region is most distinct from the primary stellar locus, are
i
−
z
i-z
,
i
−
y
i-y
,
I
E
−
Y
E
I_{E}-Y_{E}
,
I
E
−
H
E
I_{E}-H_{E}
,
i
−
Y
E
i-Y_{E}
,
i
−
H
E
i-H_{E}
, and
I
E
−
y
I_{E}-y
. Notably, the colors that best distinguish UCDs include either
i
i
or
I
E
I_{E}
while colors involving
z
,
y
z,y
with later bands do not significantly accentuate UCDs beyond the 95% distributions of other objects. This has significant implications: UCDs are intrinsically faint in optical wavelengths and the faintest UCDs are likely to drop out of optical detectability ranges, complicating their classification.
After applying our color criteria, 254 of the original 260,311 objects (0.1%) remain. Combining all four selection criteria (detection quality, SNR, extendedness, and color), further reduces the sample until we reach our final set of 89 candidates (0.03% of the original sample) across the two fields. The progressive filtering done is shown in Figure
3
. After applying our selection criteria, we visually inspected all 89 candidates in both LSST and Euclid images to make sure no artifacts or clearly extended objects remained. No such issues were present with the 89 candidates and all selections were retained.
IV.2
Selected Candidates
We present the 89 selected candidates in Table
4
. In Figure
5
we show the positions of the 44 candidates within the ECDFS field and the remaining 45 in the EDFS field. A majority of the candidates have been previously discovered by
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
,
Z. Zhang & Y. Li (
2025
)
, or
M. dal Ponte et al. (
2023
)
. In ECDFS, we found 10 new candidates, confirmed 28 from
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
, 1 from both
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
and
Z. Zhang & Y. Li (
2025
)
, and 5 from
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
and
M. dal Ponte et al. (
2023
)
. Similarly, in EDFS, we present 7 new candidates, recover 33 from
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
, confirmed 4 from both
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
and
M. dal Ponte et al. (
2023
)
, and 1 from
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
,
Z. Zhang & Y. Li (
2025
)
, and
M. dal Ponte et al. (
2023
)
. We denote new and previously discovered objects with the “CRef” column in Table
4
. There are additional objects within both fields discovered by
Z. Zhang & Y. Li (
2025
)
and
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
that do not meet our SNR or extendedness criteria and thus are excluded from our candidate list. For example, some objects in
Z. Zhang & Y. Li (
2025
)
are only detected in the
y
y
band and are excluded in our criteria since we cannot construct optical colors for such objects. In Figure
6
we show our candidates’
SNR
i
,
z
,
y
\mathrm{SNR}_{i,z,y}
compared to our selection criteria. Retained candidates reach
i
=
25.65
i=25.65
mag,
z
=
24.30
z=24.30
mag, and
y
=
23.29
y=23.29
mag, significantly fainter than the majority of known UCDs with optical photometry.
Figure 5:
Candidate object positions in both the ECDFS (left) and EDFS (right) fields are overplotted on all objects with LSST and Euclid cross-matches, shown as black dots. Of the 89 candidates, 45 are in ECDFS and 44 are in EDFS. Orange dots represent candidates unique to this work, purple squares are candidates also found in
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
,
Z. Zhang & Y. Li (
2025
)
, or
M. dal Ponte et al. (
2023
)
.
Figure 6:
Final candidate objects’ SNR in the LSST
i
,
z
,
y
i,z,y
bands are shown in red dots against all objects with LSST and Euclid cross-matches.
SNR
\mathrm{SNR}
decreases as object magnitudes increase. Applying more conservative SNR cuts in the
z
z
band compared to the
i
,
y
i,y
bands allow for the selection of fainter candidates.
Figure 7:
Candidates are shown in LSST-only color-color plots (upper left and upper middle panels) as well as a Euclid-only color-color plot (upper right panel). Candidates are shown as red points with their color uncertainties while LSST point sources detected in both LSST and Euclid are plotted as black dots. One candidate, LSST-O-592912676070375482 (hereafter J0354-4900), is marked in magenta across all three upper panels. J0354-4900 is an optically red outlier in
i
i
-based colors but does not stand out from other candidates in
I
E
I_{E}
-based colors. On the bottom row of panels, we show the LSST
i
i
(lower left),
z
z
(lower middle), and the Euclid
I
E
I_{E}
(lower right) coadds for J0354-4900, marked by the magenta crosshair. All three cutout images are 6.9
″
\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolArcsecond}
×
\times
6.9
″
\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolArcsecond}
. In the LSST images, a nearby (
∼
1.5
​
″
\sim 1.5$\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolArcsecond}$
separation) galaxy is blended with the candidate. However, with Euclid’s space-based PSF, the two objects can be clearly separated into a galaxy and point source.
Table 4:
UCD candidates in LSST DP1’s ECDFS and EDFS fields
Column Label
Description
Example
Units
objectId
LSST DP1 identifier (LSST-DP1-O-)
592913088387238886
592913088387238886
…
object_id
Euclid QR1 identifier
−
595810742488645292
-595810742488645292
…
RA
LSST RA
59.58108532
59.58108532
deg
RA_Err
Uncertainty of LSST RA
0.00000959
deg
DEC
LSST DEC
−
48.86452976
-48.86452976
deg
DEC_Err
Uncertainty of LSST DEC
0.00001166
deg
imag
LSST
i
i
magnitude
24.233
24.233
mag
imag_Err
Uncertainty of LSST
i
i
magnitude
0.064
0.064
mag
zmag
LSST
z
z
magnitude
22.677
22.677
mag
zmag_Err
Uncertainty of LSST
z
z
magnitude
0.033
0.033
mag
ymag
LSST
y
y
magnitude
21.779
21.779
mag
ymag_Err
Uncertainty of LSST
y
y
magnitude
0.052
0.052
mag
IEmag
Euclid visible
I
E
I_{E}
magnitude
24.246
24.246
mag
IEmag_Err
Uncertainty of Euclid visible
I
E
I_{E}
magnitude
0.066
0.066
mag
YEmag
Euclid
Y
E
Y_{E}
magnitude
21.569
21.569
mag
YEmag_Err
Uncertainty of Euclid
Y
E
Y_{E}
magnitude
0.037
0.037
mag
JEmag
Euclid
J
E
J_{E}
magnitude
21.180
21.180
mag
JEmag_Err
Uncertainty of Euclid
J
E
J_{E}
magnitude
0.024
0.024
mag
HEmag
Euclid
H
E
H_{E}
magnitude
20.975
20.975
mag
HEmag_Err
Uncertainty of Euclid
H
E
H_{E}
magnitude
0.021
0.021
mag
Phototemp
Photometric temperature estimate from this work
2400
2400
K
CRef
a
a
Cross-references are coded such that: 0 - Unique to this work; 1 - Also in
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
; 2 - Also in
Z. Zhang & Y. Li (
2025
)
; 3 - Also in
M. dal Ponte et al. (
2023
)
.
Cross-referenced literature containing this object
0
…
Note. — The complete table is available in a machine-readable format in the online journal.
We show the candidates in two LSST-only and one Euclid-only color-color plot in Figure
7
. The majority of candidates form an extension to the arm of the stellar locus. The one extreme red outlier in optical plots, LSST-O-592912676070375482 (hereafter J0354-4900), is marked in magenta and sits within the main grouping of candidates in the Euclid color-color plot. J0354-4900 is underluminous in
i
i
compared to other candidates but normal in
z
,
y
z,y
. Photometric uncertainties for the object’s
i
i
band are larger (
∼
0.1
\sim 0.1
mag) than for the
z
,
y
z,y
bands (
∼
0.01
\sim 0.01
mag). J0354-4900 was one of the DES counterparts discussed in Section
III.2
and is not a red outlier in DES photometry. Visual inspection of both LSST and Euclid images reveal a nearby galaxy (LSST-O-592912676070375483,
∼
\sim
1.5
″
\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolArcsecond}
separation) that is well separated from J0354-4900 in Euclid’s
I
E
I_{E}
band but is moderately blended in all other bands except for
y
y
. The galaxy is not detected in
y
y
. The Euclid
I
E
I_{E}
band also clearly shows J0354-4900 is a distinct point source with a nearby galactic neighbor and not an extended object. The added value from space-based imaging with sharp PSFs cannot be overstated for star/galaxy separation of faint objects. In the LSST pipelines, the galaxy and UCD candidate share the same
parentObjectId
, meaning they were deblended from the same footprint. We retrieved the Euclid spectrum for J0354-4900 and compared it to UCD spectral standards using SPLAT
(A. J. Burgasser & Splat Development Team,
2017
)
. We found J0354-4900 was best matched by the L1 standard 2MASSW J2130446-084520
(D. C. Bardalez Gagliuffi et al.,
2014
)
. The candidate shows strong H
2
O absorption features that support an L dwarf classification. Despite its exceptionally red optical appearance, there were no youth signatures in the spectral
H
H
band region.
Given the large number of faint galaxies LSST and Euclid expect to discover, deblended photometry in cases like this will be a point of concern that users must account for in future data releases. Larger samples of objects with nearby neighbors will be critical to understanding best practices with deblended objects.
Table 5:
New UCD candidates unique to this work
LSST ID
Euclid ID
RA
a
a
From LSST
Dec
a
a
From LSST
LSST-DP1-O-
hh:mm:ss
dd:mm:ss
592912469911949248
-595159828490212530
03:58:03.83
-49:01:16.5
592913088387238886
-595810742488645292
03:58:19.46
-48:51:52.3
592913157106711625
-594657596488527189
03:57:51.78
-48:51:09.9
592913294545663770
-589926114489600687
03:55:58.22
-48:57:36.2
592913844301475139
-593355476488116819
03:57:20.53
-48:48:42.1
592914600215726820
-592461704485544037
03:56:59.07
-48:33:15.9
592914600215728764
-591754925485342024
03:56:42.12
-48:32:03.1
609781520902663878
-528443113285004828
03:31:22.63
-28:30:01.7
609788117972430474
-533063258285767848
03:33:13.52
-28:34:36.5
611253560813816607
-535002664282505237
03:34:00.07
-28:15:01.9
611253766972261787
-530762753282415330
03:32:18.30
-28:14:29.6
611254248008592910
-535740731281853027
03:34:17.78
-28:11:07.0
611254591605987636
-525246558280277292
03:30:05.92
-28:01:39.9
611255072642314468
-532423102279750234
03:32:58.15
-27:58:30.1
611255828556559519
-530196424278331491
03:32:04.71
-27:49:59.3
611255828556562234
-530758584277963269
03:32:18.20
-27:47:46.8
611255965995500477
-526492580278177462
03:30:35.82
-27:49:03.9
IV.2.1
Phototemp Estimate
To characterize our candidates, we showcase the potential of a phototype algorithm as originally described in
N. Skrzypek et al. (
2015
)
. Phototype algorithms classify an object by comparing the object’s photometry to a series of templates. This method is extremely powerful for the classification of objects in regions without spectroscopic follow up and well suited to large surveys. Ideally, the templates should be empirical samples of objects in the photometric systems available, but such a sample is not yet possible. We show the potential of a phototype method by combining LSST photometry with Euclid, but the concept can easily be extended to other infrared surveys (e.g. VHS, Roman, CatWISE).
Since we do not have a readily available sample of well understood objects in the LSST photometric system, we instead build our phototype estimator using SANDee, a grid of model atmospheres
(R. Gerasimov et al.,
2024
)
. The SANDee models span from
0.0001
−
999.5
0.0001-999.5
μ
\mu
m and describe objects with temperatures from
T
eff
=
700
T_{\text{eff}}=700
K to
4
,
000
4,000
K, metallicities from [Fe/H]
=
−
2.4
=-2.4
to
+
0.3
+0.3
, surface gravities from
log
⁡
g
=
2
\log{g}=2
to
6
6
, and alpha-enhancement from [
α
\alpha
/H]
=
−
0.05
=-0.05
to
0.4
0.4
. The SANDee models are an extension to the SAND evolutionary models
(E. Alvarado et al.,
2024
)
, both of which are specifically designed for low-mass stars and brown dwarfs. We compute synthetic colors in the LSST and Euclid bandpasses for all SANDee models. The LSST filter transmission profiles were retrieved from the LSST project’s GitHub repository
8
8
8
https://github.com/lsst-pst/syseng_throughputs/tree/main
and the Euclid bandpasses were retrieved from the Spanish Virtual Observatory (SVO;
C. Rodrigo et al.
2024
,
2012
; C. Rodrigo & E. Solano
2020
).
For our phototype estimator, we only consider SANDee models with alpha-enhancement
−
0.05
≤
[
α
/
H
]
≤
+
0.2
-0.05\leq[\alpha\mathrm{/H}]\leq+0.2
, metallicities
−
1.1
≤
[
Fe
/
H
]
≤
+
0.3
-1.1\leq[\mathrm{Fe/H}]\leq+0.3
and surface gravities
3.5
≤
log
⁡
g
≤
5.0
3.5\leq\log{g}\leq 5.0
. The alpha-enhancement and metallicity ranges were selected to best represent primarily galactic thin disk populations with some contributions from thick disk population properties
(J. T. Mackereth et al.,
2019
)
. We employ all the model temperatures to include negative samples for objects that are hotter than the late M and L dwarfs we seek to classify. Such objects should not be selected through our color criteria, but we include the templates to classify them should they pass all selection criteria. To create model templates, we compute the median color values for all models of a given temperature, resulting in a total of 30 templates ranging from
800
800
K to
4
,
000
4,000
K in steps of
100
100
K. Next, we classify our candidates using a
χ
2
\chi^{2}
criterion, detailed in
Appendix A
. This process assigns a single best-fitting template for each candidate as the candidate’s phototype. However, since our templates are labeled by temperature and not spectral type, we refer to the best-fitting template as the candidate’s “phototemp”.
Figure 8:
Candidate objects are shown with colored points against LSST point sources (black dots). The candidates are colored by their best matching template temperature, determined by phototype using the SANDee models. Candidate marker shapes are such that circles are unique to this work and triangles are objects also found in
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
,
Z. Zhang & Y. Li (
2025
)
, or
M. dal Ponte et al. (
2023
)
. Combining LSST and Euclid filters allows for a clear temperature sequence to be seen in
z
−
J
E
z-J_{E}
for late M and early L type dwarfs.
With each candidate having an assigned phototemp, we show the candidates using combined optical and NIR colors in Figure
8
. A clear temperature sequence can be seen as
z
−
J
E
z-J_{E}
and
y
−
H
E
y-H_{E}
increase. The warmest candidates have phototemps reaching 2,800 K, roughly equivalent to M7 spectral types, and the coolest candidate phototemps reach 2,100 K, entering the early L dwarf sequence
(J. D. Kirkpatrick et al.,
2021
)
. Of our 89 candidates, 31 have phototemps
≤
2
,
300
\leq 2,300
K, consistent with L dwarf temperatures (18 in ECDFS, 13 in EDFS). One of the two coldest object is indeed the extreme red outlier discussed in Section
IV.2
, LSST-O-592912676070375482, with has a phototemp of 2,100 K, consistent with an early L1/L2 spectral type
J. D. Kirkpatrick et al. (
2021
)
. This result agrees with the Euclid spectrum for this object.
In
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
,
I
E
−
Y
E
I_{E}-Y_{E}
is used as a spectral type proxy, where objects with
2.5
≤
I
E
−
Y
E
≤
2.9
2.5\leq I_{E}-Y_{E}\leq 2.9
are likely late-M dwarfs and objects with
2.9
≤
I
E
−
Y
E
≤
3.8
2.9\leq I_{E}-Y_{E}\leq 3.8
are L dwarfs. Of our 89 candidates, 66 have
I
E
−
Y
E
I_{E}-Y_{E}
between 2.5 and 2.9. These 66 objects have phototemps centered around
2450
±
150
2450\pm 150
K with a distinctly decreasing trend as
I
E
−
Y
E
I_{E}-Y_{E}
increases. The remaining 23 candidates have
I
E
−
Y
E
I_{E}-Y_{E}
colors between 2.9 and 3.2; all 23 of these candidates have phototemps centered around
2250
±
100
2250\pm 100
K, most concentrated at 2,200 K and 2,300 K. The phototemps for these 23 candidates are comparable to objects with very late M or early L spectral types. To further validate our phototemps, we examined available Euclid spectra for our candidates. A substantial portion of these spectra showed M dwarf features and a few showed L dwarf features. However, the majority of the coolest phototemp candidates’ spectra did not contain sufficient signal to definitively classify as UCDs. None of the candidate spectra showed spectral signatures that would be expected of background extragalactic contaminants.
V
Upcoming LSST DP2 Predictions
In this section, we preview upcoming LSST Data Preview 2 (DP2) fields and relative depths. In each case, we discuss predicted yields of UCDs (specifically brown dwarfs) and draw attention to key areas with potential difficulties.
V.1
Road to LSST Data Release 1
As of September 21, 2025, the Rubin Observatory completed Science Verification surveys and the formal 10-year survey operations is anticipated to begin in mid 2026. The survey timeline and scheduled data releases have fluid target dates, but the second Data Preview (DP2) is expected to be released in June - September 2026. Early science plans for DP2 and DR1 are discussed in great depth in
L. P. Guy et al. (
2025
)
. We briefly expand on two key components of DP2 and their implications for UCD science below.
V.1.1
Deep Drilling Fields
LSST’s 10-year survey plan includes a Wide-Fast-Deep survey, covering 19.6k deg
2
. Additionally, the survey will focus on six
∼
\sim
1.8 deg
2
Deep Drilling Fields (DDFs) to reach deeper photometric depth and enhanced time-domain coverage. Observations of all six DDFs will be included in DP2 with varying completeness and photometric depth by field; exact visit counts and coadded depths can be found in
L. P. Guy et al. (
2025
)
and are reproduced in Table
6
. Two fields (ELAISS1, COSMOS) have visits in all six bands, three fields (EDFS_A, EDFS_B, ECDFS) have visits in the
g
,
r
,
i
,
z
g,r,i,z
bands, and the final field (XMM_LSS) was only observed in the
u
u
band. While the DP2 depths for the DDFs will not reach full 10-year survey depths, ELAISS1 and COSMOS will exceed DP1 coadded depths while EDFS_A, EDFS_B, and ECDFS are expected to reach comparable depths to DP1 fields. For UCD science, the increased depth will allow for the discovery of some fainter (i.e. later spectral types), nearby objects but will primarily result in the detections of warmer objects at larger distances. Recovering large quantities of known brown dwarfs and discovering our coolest neighbors is best done with a wide field approach.
V.1.2
Science Verification Surveys
In addition to the six Deep Drilling Fields, LSSTCam commissioning included multiple wide area surveys collectively referred to as the Science Verification (SV) surveys. SV survey specifics are discussed in
K. Bechtol (
2025
)
as well as on the Rubin Community Forums.
9
9
9
https://community.lsst.org/
The SV surveys were designed to test the LSST survey cadence, produce sky templates, and commission LSSTCam. While numerous small surveys were completed, the wide survey will be the most impactful SV component for UCDs. The SV wide area includes a 3,000 deg
2
region along the ecliptic plane, a 750 deg
2
area contained within, and a 300 deg
2
area contained within, each reaching deeper photometric depths. The 3k deg
2
component is estimated to reach 5
σ
\sigma
coadded depths of
(
u
,
g
,
r
,
i
,
z
,
y
)
=
(
24.2
,
25.0
,
24.9
,
24.5
,
23.8
,
22.6
(u,g,r,i,z,y)=(24.2,25.0,24.9,24.5,23.8,22.6
mag). For comparison, the Dark Energy Survey Data Release 2 (DES DR2) covered 5,000 deg
2
to median depths of
(
g
,
r
,
i
,
z
,
Y
)
=
(
24.7
,
24.4
,
23.8
,
23.1
,
21.7
(g,r,i,z,Y)=(24.7,24.4,23.8,23.1,21.7
mag) at
SNR
∼
10
\mathrm{SNR}\sim 10
(T. M. C. Abbott et al.,
2021
)
. The SV Wide Area survey will provide a wide field approach while still reaching new photometric depths, enabling the discovery of UCDs.
V.2
Predicted Brown Dwarf Counts
To estimate potential brown dwarf yields in DP2, we employ the synthetic brown dwarf population created and described in depth in
E. J. Honaker & J. E. Gizis (
2025
)
. To briefly summarize, the population models L0 - Y2 brown dwarfs in the Solar Neighborhood using recent
Gaia
-derived star formation rate histories
(A. Mazzi et al.,
2024
)
, the substellar initial mass function
(J. D. Kirkpatrick et al.,
2021
)
, age-metallicity relation
(P. Dal Tio et al.,
2021
)
, and local space densities
(W. M. J. Best et al.,
2024
)
. The simulation extends vertically 1.3 kpc above and below the Galactic Plane as well as 200 pc radially outward from the Sun. For this work, we extend this simulation radially outward from 200 pc to 1 kpc. In doing so, we assume the brown dwarf spatial distribution and local star formation rate does not change significantly along the Galactic Plane in the additional volume, both reasonable assumptions since Galactic radial scale length is
∼
\sim
2.6 kpc
(M. Jurić et al.,
2008
)
. Since the scale height of the thick disk is 900 pc, the population is almost entirely comprised of thin and thick disk objects, with little to no contribution from halo populations. Using the star formation rate histories, local space densities, initial mass function, and age-metallicity relation, the simulation determines the number of objects in cylindrical slices of the simulated sphere and assigns each object an age, mass, and metallicity. Then, the simulation interpolates these parameters over the Sonora Diamondback evolutionary models
(C. V. Morley et al.,
2024
)
to assign objects temperatures, radii, and luminosities. We translate the temperatures into spectral types (L0-Y2) using temperature-spectral type relations from
J. D. Kirkpatrick et al. (
2021
)
.
The original simulated population lacks photometry, but includes object spectral types and 3D positions. Using the Ultracool Sheet
(W. M. J. Best et al.,
2025
)
, we determine the median Pan-STARRS (PS1) absolute
z
z
magnitude as a function of spectral type. Based on the absolute magnitude-spectral type relation, we assign simulated objects absolute
z
z
magnitudes with a 1
σ
\sigma
scatter and compute apparent
z
z
magnitudes using their simulated positions. We also determined median
i
−
z
i-z
and
z
−
y
z-y
PS1 colors as a function of spectral type and assign apparent
i
,
y
i,y
magnitudes to the simulated population with a 1
σ
\sigma
scatter. For spectral types later than T5, there were not enough objects with optical PS1
i
i
band photometry to determine a statistically significant color-spectral type relation.
Z. Zhang & Y. Li (
2025
)
recently showed using atmospheric models and synthetic photometry that differences between the PS1 and LSST photometric systems for brown dwarfs are
∼
\sim
0.02 mag for
i
,
z
i,z
and
∼
\sim
0.1 mag for
y
y
(
y
L
​
S
​
S
​
T
−
y
P
​
S
​
1
∼
−
0.1
y_{LSST}-y_{PS1}\sim-0.1
).
10
10
10
In
Z. Zhang & Y. Li (
2025
)
, the
y
y
difference between the LSST and PS1 systems varies from 0.0 to -0.5 mag, but we are primarily concerned with L dwarfs (1400 K - 2400 K) where LSST will be most competitive. For L dwarfs, the photometric offset is centered at -0.1 mag.
Since 0.02 mag is smaller than the applied scatter for both the simulated
i
i
and
z
z
magnitudes, we simply adopt the PS1
i
,
z
i,z
values as LSST magnitudes. For the
y
y
band, we subtract 0.1 mag from the simulated values to obtain LSST magnitudes. While a more rigorous approach is possible, our aim is to broadly estimate the number of brown dwarfs that may be detected in DP2 and the minor differences introduced between the PS1 and LSST photometric systems yield a smaller effect on the final counts than earlier assumptions on survey depths and footprints.
Table 6:
DP2 DDF and SV 3k deg
2
depths
Field
u
g
r
i
z
y
(mag)
(mag)
(mag)
(mag)
(mag)
(mag)
XMM_LSS
25.3
…
…
…
…
…
EDFS_A
…
25.3
25.2
25.0
24.1
…
EDFS_B
…
25.4
25.1
25.0
24.1
…
ECDFS
…
25.8
25.5
25.3
24.7
…
ELAISS1
25.6
26.6
26.1
26.2
25.1
22.7
COSMOS
26.0
26.8
26.3
26.1
25.3
23.9
3k deg
2
(SV)
24.2
25.0
24.9
24.5
23.8
22.6
Note. — Depths for the six DDFs and the SV 3k deg
2
are reproduced from Table 3 and Table 2 in
L. P. Guy et al.
(
2025
)
, respectively.
For the DDFs and SV wide survey, we predict the number of potential brown dwarf detections using their pointings and estimated photometric depths (Table
6
). For the DDFs, we use the central coordinates and photometric depths reported in
L. P. Guy et al. (
2025
)
. We only consider the five DDFs with
z
z
band photometry. For the SV Wide Area survey, we use the footprint of visit pointings related to the 3k deg
2
, 750 deg
2
, and 300 deg
2
surveys and the 3k deg
2
depths. We predict brown dwarf counts by determining the number of simulated objects that appear within each survey component’s respective footprints and are brighter than the estimated depth limits. In doing so, we assume all pointings across the entire footprint are usable with good image quality and that the visits combine to reach the target coadded depths. These assumptions results in an overprediction from image quality and an underprediction from survey depth (i.e. the 750 deg
2
and 300 deg
2
SV components will reach
∼
\sim
0.5 mag deeper in all three bands). Propagating uncertainties from the scatter in the absolute magnitude-spectral type relation used yields predicted count differences of
30
%
30\%
for the DDF and SV fields. As such, our predicted counts should be viewed as an order of magnitude estimate, not an exact count.
Before discussing predicted detection counts in the DDFs and SV, we first confirm our simulation predicts the appropriate number of objects for DP1. The simulation predicts 19 brown dwarfs in ECDFS and 11 in EDFS brighter than the photometric depth limits in all three filters. These counts are exclusively for objects with spectral types L0 and later and do not reflect the M dwarfs selected in Section
IV.2
nor do they predict the extendedness, saturation, or SNR of such objects. These predictions are in good agreement with our candidates and their phototemps from Section
IV.2
(18 objects in ECDFS and 13 in EDFS with phototemps
≤
\leq
2,300 K). The simulation was previously validated in
E. J. Honaker & J. E. Gizis (
2025
)
against various age distributions and scale heights from kinematic samples of brown dwarfs
(T. J. Dupuy & M. C. Liu,
2017
; C. Aganze et al.,
2022
)
.
V.2.1
Deep Drilling Field Counts
From the Ultracool Sheet, only one object fell within the DP1 footprints. There are six objects that fall within the Deep Drilling Field footprints: three in COSMOS (SDSS J100401.41+005354.9, L2; CFBDS J100113.05+022622.3, T5; CFBDS J095914.80+023655.2, T3.5), one in ELAISS1 (EROS-MP J0032-4405, L0), one in EDFS_B (WISE J041358.14-475039.3, T9), and one in XMM_LSS (2MASS J021857.92-061749.9, M8). Of the six objects, only 2MASS J021857.92-061749.9 and SDSS J100401.41+005354.9 have optical photometry included in the Ultracool Sheet suggesting that LSST may provide the first optical observations of the other four. Note that XMM_LSS only includes
u
u
band visits making characterization of new brown dwarf candidates difficult.
To predict potential DDF brown dwarf detection counts, we compare the DDF footprints and estimated photometric depths (see
L. P. Guy et al.
2025
) to our synthetic population with
i
,
z
,
y
i,z,y
band photometry. We consider an object detectable if it is within 1.8
deg
\deg
from a DDF’s central coordinate and brighter than at least one of the three magnitude limits.
Our simulation shows the following detection counts. The number of objects that can be detected in both
i
i
and
z
z
and only in
z
z
for each field is as follows: EDFS_A: 34 and 21; EDFS_B: 31 and 27; ECDFS: 44 and 34. As expected for brown dwarf SEDs, there is no case where an object is detected in the
i
i
band but none of the redder bandpasses.
ELAISS1 and COSMOS have coverage in
i
i
,
z
z
, and
y
y
. The counts of objects that can be detected in
i
i
,
z
z
, and
y
y
, only in
i
i
and
z
z
, and lastly only in
z
z
are: ELAISS1: 37, 36, and 29; COSMOS 71, 28, and 17. For both the ELAISS1 and COSMOS DDFs, the
y
y
band depth limit is respectively shallower than the
z
z
band depth, resulting in no objects that can only be detected in
y
y
.
We predict there will be on the order of 400 objects detectable with at least one of the
i
i
,
z
z
,
y
y
filters for the five DDFs considered (
∼
\sim
90 objects/field) in DP2. Of those 400 objects, 281 would have sufficient photometry to construct at least one
i
,
z
,
y
i,z,y
-based color.
Our simulations also show that for all fields, the distribution of spectral types for the detectable objects greatly favor earlier spectral types (early- to mid-L dwarfs) but include some single and occasional two-band detections of later spectral types (mid-T dwarfs). Detection of later type dwarfs with multiple bands relies heavily on
y
y
band photometry and occurs most often in the COSMOS field. The skew towards earlier spectral types, and therefore brighter objects that can be detected at greater distances, is a common shortcoming of magnitude-limited surveys and is not unexpected. The expected number of brown dwarf counts in the DDFs are significantly higher than the DP1 fields since the DDFs are
∼
\sim
0.5 magnitudes deeper in each band but more importantly each DDF covers 1.8 deg
2
compared to the DP1 fields’
∼
\sim
1 deg
2
. We note that the predicted number of brown dwarfs detectable in the DDFs is much larger than the number of known objects (6) expected to appear within the fields: the DP2 DDFs will present an immediate opportunity to identify and characterize a substantial number of new discoveries.
V.2.2
Science Verification Survey Counts
The DDF estimations show a significant, but manageable number of known brown dwarfs and potential new discoveries. While the DDFs are deeper than the SV survey footprint, the DDFs cover a total on-sky area of
∼
\sim
9 deg
2
, less than 1% of the SV footprint. From the Ultracool Sheet, there are 396 known objects that fall within the 3k deg
2
survey footprint (110 M dwarfs, 188 L dwarfs, 88 T dwarfs, 5 Y dwarfs). While the late-T and Y dwarfs will most likely be undetectable by LSST unless they are exceptionally nearby, we anticipate the vast majority of the M and L dwarfs will be detectable.
The
∼
\sim
400 known objects within the SV footprint are a large, but manageable, number of objects to follow up and characterize. However, our simulation predicts that across the entire 3k deg
2
SV footprint, assuming the shallowest survey depths (
i
,
z
,
y
=
24.5
,
23.8
,
22.6
i,z,y=24.5,23.8,22.6
mag), there will be
∼
45
,
000
\sim 45,000
objects detectable in at least one filter. Since only one filter is not enough information to separate a brown dwarf from other objects, we note that
∼
33
,
000
\sim 33,000
of the objects will be detected by both the
z
z
and
y
y
bands and
∼
17
,
000
\sim 17,000
of those objects will be detectable in all three bands. Notable brown dwarf archives like the Ultracool Sheet or SIMPLE archive
(K. Cruz et al.,
2025
)
each contain
∼
4
,
000
\sim 4,000
objects. Even the
17
,
000
17,000
predicted objects with 3-band photometric coverage represent a 325% increase. As such, brown dwarf science truly enters the realm of big data where careful thought must be put into follow-up observation strategies to maximize resource allocation.
V.3
Future Outlook
With our predictions for detection counts in DP2’s Deep Drilling Fields and Science Verification surveys, we now turn to discuss two areas of importance for maximizing the value of LSST in DP2 and beyond.
V.3.1
Infrared Cross-matching with LSST
Since brown dwarfs emit the vast majority of their flux in the infrared beyond LSST’s
y
y
band, supplementing LSST with near- and mid-infrared measurements is necessary to fully characterize brown dwarf candidates. While this can be reasonably well done for LSST DP1 with existing surveys like VHS or CatWISE, LSST already has the capability to detect objects that are fainter than the respective infrared magnitude depths; as LSST progresses, only Euclid and Roman will be able to match LSST’s depths.
In Figure
9
, we compare the relative depths of different optical and infrared surveys to show which can adequately match LSST’s depth. To do so, we model six objects with temperatures ranging from 2,500 K down to 400 K (spectral types
∼
\sim
M7 - Y2) using Sonora Diamondback (2,500 K, 1,600 K, 1,200 K, 900 K;
C. V. Morley et al.
2024
) and ExoRem (600 K, 400 K;
J.-L. Baudino et al.
2015
; B. Charnay et al.
2018
; D. Blain et al.
2021
) model atmospheres with solar metallicity and
log
⁡
g
=
5
\log{g}=5
. We flux calibrate all objects to the
i
i
band DP1 (
i
=
25.77
i=25.77
AB mag) and 10-year (
i
=
26.8
i=26.8
AB mag) survey median depths to simulate an object being barely detected in
i
i
and dropping below detection thresholds in bluer bandpasses. Then, we calculate synthetic magnitudes in the MKO
J
,
H
,
K
J,H,K
and WISE
W
​
1
,
W
​
2
W1,W2
bandpasses. Already with LSST DP1 median depths (
r
,
i
,
z
,
y
=
26.34
,
25.77
,
24.90
,
23.02
r,i,z,y=26.34,25.77,24.90,23.02
for ECDFS), brown dwarfs at the
i
i
band detection limit are almost entirely below 2MASS detection limits and reach maximum VHS and CatWISE depths.
In the right panel of Figure
9
, we repeat the simulation using the estimated LSST 10-year depths. At full survey depths, objects that reach the
i
i
band depth limit exceed VHS and CatWISE depths with the exception of only the coldest, most nearby objects. This effect is even greater for objects that drop out of the
i
i
band and reach the
z
z
band detection limit; in such cases, even DP1 depths exceed the equivalent VHS and CatWISE depths and full survey depths yield objects well below infrared survey depths. However, Euclid and Roman promise to complement LSST’s depth with matching (and exceeding) infrared depth. These two space-based observatories will be indispensable to LSST UCD science. As seen in Section
IV.1.4
, joint optical and infrared colors are critical to ultracool dwarf identification and classification. In order to maximize the impact of LSST for brown dwarf science in future data releases, cross-matching must be done using surveys with appropriate depths.
Figure 9:
We simulated synthetic magnitudes in various infrared surveys for objects with temperatures between
T
eff
=
400
T_{\text{eff}}=400
K to
2
,
500
2,500
K that reach the LSST
i
i
band photometric depth limit. Various survey wavelength coverage and depths in AB magnitudes are shown in both panels as horizontal lines. The simulated object magnitudes are shown as circles, color-coded by temperature. Surveys and objects retain the same color scheme for both panels. In the left panel, we flux calibrate objects to reach the DP1
i
i
band depth and nearly all objects are below 2MASS detection thresholds but above VHS and CatWISE limits. In the right panel, we repeat the process using the full LSST 10-year survey
i
i
band depth and the majority of objects exceed the VHS faintness limits and are only detectable by Euclid or Roman.
V.3.2
LSST Astrometry
As the LSST survey progresses, its astrometric precision promises to deliver high-quality parallaxes and proper motions. For astrometric purposes, LSST can be considered an extension of the Gaia mission for faint objects in the Southern sky. LSST uses the same GBDES astrometry algorithm that was used on the Dark Energy Survey
(G. M. Bernstein et al.,
2017
)
. However, reliable astrometric solutions are not expected to be available until after several data releases with a sufficient time baseline. Note that astrometric solution parameters will be available in data products before such time, but are not expected to be reliable, especially for faint, high proper motion objects.
Eventually, LSST-only selection of UCDs may be possible, but will require proper motions. Historically, UCD searches have combined optical and infrared data, but UCD candidates can be distinguished without infrared information by their red optical colors, high proper motions, and large parallaxes. We originally attempted our candidate selection only using current LSST data, but found the results to be too inefficient and requiring inordinate amounts of follow up to confirm/exclude candidates’ UCD nature.
Reliable distances and kinematics for the unprecedented sample of UCDs that LSST will discover are critical for a multitude of science cases. Here we specifically discuss the luminosity function for UCDs. Using LSST parallaxes, one can construct a large volume-limited sample and measure the luminosity for UCDs, probing formation mechanisms, cooling rates, age distributions, binary fractions, and space densities. For the brown dwarf population synthesis model used in Section
V.2
, we applied two different evolutionary models and produced two different synthetic populations. Reported predictions come from the population built using the Sonora Diamondback hybrid evolutionary models, but the same simulation can be built using the Sonora Bobcat cloudless evolutionary models. We compared the two populations as they would be detected by DP2 and found that significant differences in their luminosity functions can be identified, but only if objects have reliable distance measurements, which will not be the case for UCDs in DP2 or DR1. Despite low total sky coverage, a volume-limited sample of DP2 objects can probe different luminosity function morphologies related to the L/T transition (for a more detailed investigation of brown dwarf luminosity functions, see
E. J. Honaker & J. E. Gizis
2025
and references therein). We attempted to build an optical color-based distance estimator using PS1
z
−
y
z-y
colors and absolute
z
z
magnitudes from the Ultracool Sheet, but found the sharp turn between
0.85
≲
(
z
−
y
)
≲
1.1
0.85\lesssim(z-y)\lesssim 1.1
results in prohibitively large uncertainties. A distance estimator built from joint optical and infrared photometry may yield better results, but is beyond the scope of this work.
LSST will produce exquisite astrometric measurements for objects, but reliable astrometric solutions for faint, high proper motion UCDs will require a substantial baseline extending several data releases into the survey. Yet, numerous science cases can immediately make use of DP2 and DR1 datasets if objects have reliable distance measurements. Consequently, cross-matching to adequately deep, existing infrared surveys will be a pivotal stopgap.
VI
Conclusion
In this work, we have showcased LSST’s potential for discovering and characterizing ultracool dwarfs (UCDs). Since LSST presents a new optical photometric system, we began by searching for known UCDs within Data Preview 1 (DP1) and found one known object from the Ultracool Sheet. Using UCD candidates from the Dark Energy Survey, we recovered 17 known UCDs across 3 DP1 fields and spectral typed 9 of them using Euclid spectroscopy. We repeated the search process for known low-mass stars and UCDs from the Gaia Catalog of Nearby stars and found 40 objects with LSST counterparts. However, the majority of nearby, low-mass stars with absolute Gaia
G
G
magnitude
M
G
>
12
M_{G}>12
saturate in LSST’s 30 second exposures and create artifacts that can easily be mistaken for color outliers. LSST will be a powerful tool for understanding the low-mass end of the main sequence, but can be limited for very nearby (
<
100
<100
pc) F, G, or K stars.
Next, we leveraged the synergies between LSST and Euclid to search for new UCD candidates in the ECDFS and EDFS fields. Through a series of quality, signal-to-noise ratio, extendedness, and color cuts, we found 89 UCD candidates across the two fields, including 17 new discoveries and recovering 72 objects recently identified in
M. Žerjal et al. (
2025
)
,
Z. Zhang & Y. Li (
2025
)
, and
M. dal Ponte et al. (
2023
)
. In constructing our candidate sample, we detailed a more robust approach to select point sources where the LSST pipelines struggle with faint object star/galaxy separation. We also investigated the efficiency of LSST-only, Euclid-only, and joint colors at separating UCD candidates from other point sources. We found that colors using the LSST
i
i
or Euclid
I
E
I_{E}
bands provided the most separation. To characterize our candidates, we developed a photometric temperature estimator (phototemp) using the SANDee atmospheric model grid; 58 of the candidates have phototemps between 2,400 K and 2,800 K, consistent with M dwarfs. The remaining 31 candidates have phototemps ranging from 2,100 K to 2,300 K, roughly consistent with L dwarfs. Phototype methods are well suited to large surveys like LSST, but require substantial empirical samples of known objects to effectively classify unknown sources.
Finally, we used synthetic populations of brown dwarfs to predict estimated counts for upcoming LSST Data Preview 2 (DP2). We expect DP2 to contain several hundred known UCDs across the Deep Drilling Fields (DDFs) and Science Verification (SV) survey footprints. These known objects will be critical to better understanding the LSST photometric system as well as building a database of objects with known colors. In additional to known objects, our simulation predicts DP2 has the potential to detect
∼
45
,
000
\sim 45,000
brown dwarfs in at least one band, and
∼
17
,
000
\sim 17,000
may be detected in
i
,
z
,
y
i,z,y
in the SV areas. Several hundred new UCDs may be discovered in the DDFs. These discoveries would increase the current sample of brown dwarfs by a full order of magnitude but require coordinated community follow-up since that many objects will significantly outpace available observational resources. We also highlighted some key challenges in leveraging such a dataset; proper care must be taken to cross-match using appropriately deep infrared surveys to fully leverage LSST’s capabilities. Astrometrically, UCDs must rely on external distance and proper motion measurements until later in the LSST survey, but such measurements are critical to many science cases.
LSST will be a generation-defining survey that requires the entire Rubin community’s collaborative efforts to maximize scientific gain. For UCDs, LSST’s wide and deep coverage, alongside the built-in synergies with Euclid and Roman, will be instrumental in addressing some of the field’s open questions. We have showcased a small piece of LSST’s capabilities and included the lessons we have learned as we begin to understand the survey’s data products, photometric system, and analysis. In sharing these lessons with the broader scientific community, we can better prepare for the survey’s imminent beginning and upcoming data releases.
We thank the Rubin Observatory staff and community for their hard work bringing the survey to life. We also thank the observatory for the computational resources and tutorials available through the Rubin Science Platform. This work benefited from discussions with the Stars, Milky Way, and Local Volume collaboration and the Solar Neighborhood working group and we thank both organizations. The authors thank the anonymous referee for comments and suggestions. EJH is funded by Delaware Space Grant College and Fellowship Program (NASA Grant 80NSSC25M7071) and thanks fellow graduate students at UD for insightful discussions and feedback on visual elements in this work. MZ and ELM are supported by the European Union (ERC, SUBSTELLAR, project number 101054354). FBB acknowledges support from NSF Awards 2511639 and 2308016. SC is grateful for the support received from the University of Delaware Doctoral Fellowship of Excellence, and the NASA FINESST program, Grant 80NSSC25K0312.
This research has made use of the SVO Filter Profile Service “Carlos Rodrigo”, funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033/ through grant PID2023-146210NB-I00. This work has made use of the SIMPLE Archive of low-mass stars, brown dwarfs, and directly imaged exoplanets: 10.5281/zenodo.13937301. This work has made use of the Euclid Quick Release Q1 data from the Euclid mission of the European Space Agency (ESA), 2025, https://doi.org/10.57780/esa-2853f3b. This work has benefited from The UltracoolSheet at http://bit.ly/UltracoolSheet, maintained by Will Best, Trent Dupuy, Michael Liu, Aniket Sanghi, Rob Siverd, and Zhoujian Zhang, and developed from compilations by
T. J. Dupuy & M. C. Liu (
2012
)
,
T. J. Dupuy & A. L. Kraus (
2013
)
,
N. R. Deacon et al. (
2014
)
,
M. C. Liu et al. (
2016
)
,
W. M. J. Best et al. (
2018b
)
,
W. M. J. Best et al. (
2021
)
,
A. Sanghi et al. (
2023
)
, and
A. C. Schneider et al. (
2023
)
.
Appendix A
Phototemp determination
In Section
IV.2.1
, we classify candidate UCDs using a phototype method similar to
N. Skrzypek et al. (
2015
)
using the SANDee models as templates and the candidates’ LSST and Euclid photometry. We anchor this process using the candidates’ measured magnitudes and the template colors. To summarize, each candidate has photometry from LSST
i
,
z
,
y
i,z,y
and Euclid
Y
E
,
J
E
,
H
E
Y_{E},J_{E},H_{E}
, which together comprise
N
=
6
N=6
bands and create the vector of magnitudes
m
^
b
\hat{m}_{b}
, where
b
b
counts each of the six bands. Note that we avoid using the broad Euclid
I
E
I_{E}
band and instead opt for the narrower LSST
i
,
z
,
y
i,z,y
bands to capture smaller changes between templates in the optical. Colors for the candidates and templates are calculated with respect to a single band denoted as the reference band,
B
B
. Thus, any given color is
b
−
B
b-B
for each band,
b
b
, and the entire system is anchored by the reference band such that its color with itself is 0 (i.e. if one uses
J
E
J_{E}
as the reference band, all colors are computed with respect to
J
E
J_{E}
and
J
E
−
J
E
=
0
J_{E}-J_{E}=0
). Note this approach only uses colors containing the reference band. All of our SANDee templates have colors
c
b
,
t
c_{b,t}
where the
t
t
index counts the template. For each candidate, we compute a reference magnitude,
m
^
B
,
t
=
∑
b
=
1
N
(
m
^
b
−
c
b
,
t
)
/
σ
b
2
∑
b
=
1
N
(
1
/
σ
b
2
)
,
\hat{m}_{B,t}=\frac{\sum_{b=1}^{N}(\hat{m}_{b}-c_{b,t})/\sigma_{b}^{2}}{\sum_{b=1}^{N}(1/\sigma_{b}^{2})},
(A1)
where
σ
b
\sigma_{b}
is the candidate’s measured uncertainty in each band,
b
b
. Including photometric uncertainty weights the estimated reference magnitudes by the quality of measurement so that magnitudes with large uncertainties do not dominate the phototype estimation. In practice, for a system anchored using the
J
E
J_{E}
band, calculating
m
^
B
,
t
\hat{m}_{B,t}
is the same as estimating a candidate’s
J
E
J_{E}
magnitude using
N
b
N_{b}
bands given a specific template’s colors
c
b
,
t
c_{b,t}
. Next, to assign a template to the candidate, we compute and minimize the
χ
2
\chi^{2}
value for each template:
χ
2
=
∑
b
=
1
N
(
m
^
b
−
m
^
B
,
t
−
c
b
,
t
σ
b
)
2
.
\chi^{2}=\sum_{b=1}^{N}\left(\frac{\hat{m}_{b}-\hat{m}_{B,t}-c_{b,t}}{\sigma_{b}}\right)^{2}.
(A2)
The template with the lowest
χ
2
\chi^{2}
is then assigned as the best match and phototype. However, since we are not using a traditional (empirical) set of templates labeled by spectral type but rather a set of atmospheric grids sorted by temperature, we dub the best-fitting template as the candidate’s “phototemp”.
For consistency with previous studies, we anchor our phototemp system using the
J
E
J_{E}
band, but the choice of reference band is very important and has drastic impact on the classification. Here, we evaluate this impact and make suggestions for future studies. We compute
χ
2
\chi^{2}
values using colors anchored with each of the seven bands (i.e. we used each band as the reference band
m
B
m_{B}
) and compared the
χ
2
\chi^{2}
values for all candidates. Anchoring with the
i
i
band resulted in the highest
χ
2
\chi^{2}
values across the board while using the
H
E
H_{E}
band yielded the lowest values. The second lowest
χ
2
\chi^{2}
come from using the
J
E
J_{E}
band as the reference band. Resulting phototemps from using
J
E
J_{E}
versus
H
E
H_{E}
agree for 80/89 candidates while for the remaining candidates the
J
E
J_{E}
-based phototemp is within 100 K (one template) of the
H
E
H_{E}
-based equivalent (in 8 of 9 cases, the
J
E
J_{E}
phototemp is 100 K cooler). Historically, phototype systems have been anchored using whichever band is best constrained, generally a
J
J
band equivalent. In our case, both
J
E
J_{E}
and
H
E
H_{E}
are equally well-constrained since we imposed the requirement that
SNR
J
E
,
H
E
≥
3
\mathrm{SNR}_{J_{E},H_{E}}\geq 3
. Our choice of using
J
E
J_{E}
should be revisited in the future once large samples of LSST-confirmed UCDs are available. While anchoring using optical
z
z
bands is generally disfavored due to high dependencies on the bandpass red cutoff shape, incorporating additional optical bands (e.g.
g
,
r
g,r
) with LSSTCam may enhance optical phototype estimators.
References
T. M. C. Abbott et al. (2021)
Abbott, T. M. C., Adamów, M., Aguena, M., et al. 2021, The Dark Energy Survey Data Release 2, ApJS, 255, 20, doi:
10.3847/1538-4365/ac00b3
C. Aganze et al. (2022)
Aganze, C., Burgasser, A. J., Malkan, M., et al. 2022, Beyond the Local Volume. II. Population Scaleheights and Ages of Ultracool Dwarfs in Deep HST/WFC3 Parallel Fields, ApJ, 934, 73, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ac7053
R. Akeson et al. (2019)
Akeson, R., Armus, L., Bachelet, E., et al. 2019, The Wide Field Infrared Survey Telescope: 100 Hubbles for the 2020s, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1902.05569, doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1902.05569
H. B. Akins et al. (2025)
Akins, H. B., Casey, C. M., Lambrides, E., et al. 2025, COSMOS-Web: The Overabundance and Physical Nature of “Little Red Dots”—Implications for Early Galaxy and SMBH Assembly, ApJ, 991, 37, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ade984
F. Allard et al. (2007)
Allard, F., Allard, N. F., Homeier, D., et al. 2007, K-H
2
quasi-molecular absorption detected in the T-dwarf
\textbackslashvarepsilon
Indi Ba, A&A, 474, L21, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361:20078362
F. Allard et al. (2012)
Allard, F., Homeier, D., & Freytag, B. 2012, Models of very-low-mass stars, brown dwarfs and exoplanets, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series A, 370, 2765, doi:
10.1098/rsta.2011.0269
N. F. Allard et al. (2003)
Allard, N. F., Allard, F., Hauschildt, P. H., Kielkopf, J. F., & Machin, L. 2003, A new model for brown dwarf spectra including accurate unified line shape theory for the Na I and K I resonance line profiles, A&A, 411, L473, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361:20031299
N. F. Allard et al. (2005)
Allard, N. F., Allard, F., & Kielkopf, J. F. 2005, Theoretical profiles of light alkali resonance lines for brown dwarf atmosphere conditions, A&A, 440, 1195, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361:20053162
N. F. Allard et al. (2012)
Allard, N. F., Kielkopf, J. F., Spiegelman, F., Tinetti, G., & Beaulieu, J. P. 2012, Theoretical and laboratory spectra of sodium perturbed by molecular hydrogen, A&A, 543, A159, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201219037
K. N. Allers & M. C. Liu (2013)
Allers, K. N., & Liu, M. C. 2013, A Near-infrared Spectroscopic Study of Young Field Ultracool Dwarfs, ApJ, 772, 79, doi:
10.1088/0004-637X/772/2/79
E. Alvarado et al. (2024)
Alvarado, E., Gerasimov, R., Burgasser, A. J., et al. 2024, The Spectral ANalog of Dwarfs (SAND): New Model Atmospheres with Varying Chemistry for Galactic Archaeology with Ultracool Dwarfs, Research Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 8, 134, doi:
10.3847/2515-5172/ad4bd7
Astropy Collaboration et al. (2013)
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, Astropy: A community Python package for astronomy, A&A, 558, A33, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201322068
Astropy Collaboration et al. (2018)
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sipőcz, B. M., et al. 2018, The Astropy Project: Building an Open-science Project and Status of the v2.0 Core Package, AJ, 156, 123, doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f
Astropy Collaboration et al. (2022)
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Lim, P. L., et al. 2022, The Astropy Project: Sustaining and Growing a Community-oriented Open-source Project and the Latest Major Release (v5.0) of the Core Package, ApJ, 935, 167, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ac7c74
D. C. Bardalez Gagliuffi et al. (2014)
Bardalez Gagliuffi, D. C., Burgasser, A. J., Gelino, C. R., et al. 2014, SpeX Spectroscopy of Unresolved Very Low Mass Binaries. II. Identification of 14 Candidate Binaries with Late-M/Early-L and T Dwarf Components, ApJ, 794, 143, doi:
10.1088/0004-637X/794/2/143
D. C. Bardalez Gagliuffi et al. (2025)
Bardalez Gagliuffi, D. C., Faherty, J. K., Suárez, G., et al. 2025, The Diversity of Cold Worlds: A Blended-light Binary Straddling the T/Y Transition in Brown Dwarfs, ApJ, 984, 74, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/adb61e
J.-L. Baudino et al. (2015)
Baudino, J.-L., Bézard, B., Boccaletti, A., et al. 2015, Interpreting the photometry and spectroscopy of directly imaged planets: a new atmospheric model applied to
β
\beta
Pictoris b and SPHERE observations, A&A, 582, A83, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201526332
K. Bechtol (2025)
Bechtol, K. 2025, An Interim Report on the On-Sky Commissioning Campaign with LSSTCam, Commissioning Technical Note SITCOMTN-170, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory.
https://sitcomtn-170.lsst.io/
S. A. Beiler et al. (2023)
Beiler, S. A., Cushing, M. C., Kirkpatrick, J. D., et al. 2023, The First JWST Spectral Energy Distribution of a Y Dwarf, ApJ, 951, L48, doi:
10.3847/2041-8213/ace32c
G. M. Bernstein et al. (2017)
Bernstein, G. M., Armstrong, R., Plazas, A. A., et al. 2017, Astrometric Calibration and Performance of the Dark Energy Camera, PASP, 129, 074503, doi:
10.1088/1538-3873/aa6c55
W. M. J. Best et al. (2025)
Best, W. M. J., Dupuy, T. J., Liu, M. C., et al. 2025, The UltracoolSheet: Photometry, Astrometry, Spectroscopy, and Multiplicity for 4000+ Ultracool Dwarfs and Imaged Exoplanets, 2.1.0 Zenodo, doi:
10.5281/zenodo.15802304
W. M. J. Best et al. (2021)
Best, W. M. J., Liu, M. C., Magnier, E. A., & Dupuy, T. J. 2021, A Volume-limited Sample of Ultracool Dwarfs. I. Construction, Space Density, and a Gap in the L/T Transition, AJ, 161, 42, doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/abc893
W. M. J. Best et al. (2024)
Best, W. M. J., Sanghi, A., Liu, M. C., Magnier, E. A., & Dupuy, T. J. 2024, A Volume-limited Sample of Ultracool Dwarfs. II. The Substellar Age and Mass Functions in the Solar Neighborhood, ApJ, 967, 115, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ad39ef
W. M. J. Best et al. (2018a)
Best, W. M. J., Magnier, E. A., Liu, M. C., et al. 2018a, Photometry and Proper Motions of M, L, and T Dwarfs from the Pan-STARRS1 3
π
\pi
Survey, ApJS, 234, 1, doi:
10.3847/1538-4365/aa9982
W. M. J. Best et al. (2018b)
Best, W. M. J., Magnier, E. A., Liu, M. C., et al. 2018b, Photometry and Proper Motions of M, L, and T Dwarfs from the Pan-STARRS1 3
π
\pi
Survey, ApJS, 234, 1, doi:
10.3847/1538-4365/aa9982
F. B. Bianco et al. (2022)
Bianco, F. B., Ivezić, Ž., Jones, R. L., et al. 2022, Optimization of the Observing Cadence for the Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time: A Pioneering Process of Community-focused Experimental Design, ApJS, 258, 1, doi:
10.3847/1538-4365/ac3e72
D. Blain et al. (2021)
Blain, D., Charnay, B., & Bézard, B. 2021, 1D atmospheric study of the temperate sub-Neptune K2-18b, A&A, 646, A15, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202039072
J. J. Bock et al. (2026)
Bock, J. J., Aboobaker, A. M., Adamo, J., et al. 2026, The SPHEREx Satellite Mission, ApJ, 999, 139, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ae2be2
A. J. Burgasser & Splat Development Team (2017)
Burgasser, A. J., & Splat Development Team. 2017, The SpeX Prism Library Analysis Toolkit (SPLAT): A Data Curation Model, in Astronomical Society of India Conference Series, Vol. 14, Astronomical Society of India Conference Series, 7–12, doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1707.00062
A. J. Burgasser et al. (2024)
Burgasser, A. J., Bezanson, R., Labbe, I., et al. 2024, UNCOVER: JWST Spectroscopy of Three Cold Brown Dwarfs at Kiloparsec-scale Distances, ApJ, 962, 177, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ad206f
A. Burrows et al. (2001)
Burrows, A., Hubbard, W. B., Lunine, J. I., & Liebert, J. 2001, The theory of brown dwarfs and extrasolar giant planets, Reviews of Modern Physics, 73, 719, doi:
10.1103/RevModPhys.73.719
N. Caplar et al. (2025)
Caplar, N., Beebe, W., Branton, D., et al. 2025, Using LSDB to enable large-scale catalog distribution, cross-matching, and analytics, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2501.02103, doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2501.02103
C. V. Cardoso et al. (2015)
Cardoso, C. V., Burningham, B., Smart, R. L., et al. 2015, 49 new T dwarfs identified using methane imaging, MNRAS, 450, 2486, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stv380
J. L. Carlin et al. (2025)
Carlin, J. L., Ferguson, P. S., Vivas, A. K., Caplar, N., & Malanchev, K. 2025, An Outer-disk SX Phe Variable Star in Rubin Data Preview 1, Research Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 9, 161, doi:
10.3847/2515-5172/adeab0
K. C. Chambers et al. (2016)
Chambers, K. C., Magnier, E. A., Metcalfe, N., et al. 2016, The Pan-STARRS1 Surveys, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1612.05560, doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1612.05560
C. O. Chandler et al. (2025)
Chandler, C. O., Bernardinelli, P. H., Jurić, M., et al. 2025, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory Observations of Interstellar Comet 3I/ATLAS (C/2025 N1), arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2507.13409, doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2507.13409
B. Charnay et al. (2018)
Charnay, B., Bézard, B., Baudino, J.-L., et al. 2018, A Self-consistent Cloud Model for Brown Dwarfs and Young Giant Exoplanets: Comparison with Photometric and Spectroscopic Observations, ApJ, 854, 172, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/aaac7d
Y. Choi et al. (2025)
Choi, Y., Olsen, K. A. G., Carlin, J. L., et al. 2025, 47 Tuc in Rubin Data Preview 1. Exploring Early LSST Data and Science Potential, ApJ, 992, 47, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/adfb70
G. Cordoni et al. (2025)
Cordoni, G., Casagrande, L., & Jerjen, H. 2025, Rubin Data Preview 1: Extending the view of unresolved binary stars in 47 Tucanae, PASA, 42, e127, doi:
10.1017/pasa.2025.10089
K. Cruz et al. (2025)
Cruz, K., Rodriguez, D., Alejandro, S., et al. 2025, SIMPLE-AstroDB/SIMPLE-db: v4.3.2025.10, v4.3.2025.10 Zenodo, doi:
10.5281/zenodo.16640694
M. C. Cushing et al. (2011)
Cushing, M. C., Kirkpatrick, J. D., Gelino, C. R., et al. 2011, The Discovery of Y Dwarfs using Data from the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE), ApJ, 743, 50, doi:
10.1088/0004-637X/743/1/50
M. dal Ponte et al. (2023)
dal Ponte, M., Santiago, B., Carnero Rosell, A., et al. 2023, Ultracool dwarfs candidates based on 6 yr of the Dark Energy Survey data, MNRAS, 522, 1951, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stad955
P. Dal Tio et al. (2021)
Dal Tio, P., Mazzi, A., Girardi, L., et al. 2021, Dissecting the Gaia HR diagram within 200 pc, 506, 5681, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stab1964
N. R. Deacon et al. (2014)
Deacon, N. R., Liu, M. C., Magnier, E. A., et al. 2014, Wide Cool and Ultracool Companions to Nearby Stars from Pan-STARRS 1, ApJ, 792, 119, doi:
10.1088/0004-637X/792/2/119
T. J. Dupuy & A. L. Kraus (2013)
Dupuy, T. J., & Kraus, A. L. 2013, Distances, Luminosities, and Temperatures of the Coldest Known Substellar Objects, Science, 341, 1492, doi:
10.1126/science.1241917
T. J. Dupuy & M. C. Liu (2012)
Dupuy, T. J., & Liu, M. C. 2012, The Hawaii Infrared Parallax Program. I. Ultracool Binaries and the L/T Transition, ApJS, 201, 19, doi:
10.1088/0067-0049/201/2/19
T. J. Dupuy & M. C. Liu (2017)
Dupuy, T. J., & Liu, M. C. 2017, Individual Dynamical Masses of Ultracool Dwarfs, ApJS, 231, 15, doi:
10.3847/1538-4365/aa5e4c
Euclid Collaboration et al. (2025)
Euclid Collaboration, Mellier, Y., Abdurro’uf, et al. 2025, Euclid: I. Overview of the Euclid mission, A&A, 697, A1, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202450810
J. K. Faherty et al. (2009)
Faherty, J. K., Burgasser, A. J., Cruz, K. L., et al. 2009, The Brown Dwarf Kinematics Project I. Proper Motions and Tangential Velocities for a Large Sample of Late-Type M, L, and T Dwarfs, AJ, 137, 1, doi:
10.1088/0004-6256/137/1/1
J. K. Faherty et al. (2016)
Faherty, J. K., Riedel, A. R., Cruz, K. L., et al. 2016, Population Properties of Brown Dwarf Analogs to Exoplanets, ApJS, 225, 10, doi:
10.3847/0067-0049/225/1/10
Gaia Collaboration et al. (2021)
Gaia Collaboration, Smart, R. L., Sarro, L. M., et al. 2021, Gaia Early Data Release 3. The Gaia Catalogue of Nearby Stars, A&A, 649, A6, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202039498
J. P. Gardner et al. (2006)
Gardner, J. P., Mather, J. C., Clampin, M., et al. 2006, The James Webb Space Telescope, Space Sci. Rev., 123, 485, doi:
10.1007/s11214-006-8315-7
R. Gerasimov et al. (2024)
Gerasimov, R., Bedin, L. R., Burgasser, A. J., et al. 2024, JWST Imaging of the Closest Globular Clusters. II. Discovery of Brown Dwarfs in NGC 6397 and Measurement of Age from the Brown Dwarf Cooling Sequence, Using SANDee—A New Grid of Model Isochrones across the Hydrogen-burning Limit, ApJ, 971, 65, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ad5551
J. E. Gizis et al. (2013)
Gizis, J. E., Burgasser, A. J., Berger, E., et al. 2013, Kepler Monitoring of an L Dwarf. I. The Photometric Period and White-light Flares, The Astrophysical Journal, 779, 172, doi:
10.1088/0004-637X/779/2/172
J. E. Gizis et al. (2000)
Gizis, J. E., Monet, D. G., Reid, I. N., et al. 2000, New Neighbors from 2MASS: Activity and Kinematics at the Bottom of the Main Sequence, AJ, 120, 1085, doi:
10.1086/301456
S. Greenstreet et al. (2026)
Greenstreet, S., Li, Z. C., Vavilov, D. E., et al. 2026, Lightcurves, Rotation Periods, and Colors for Vera C. Rubin Observatory’s First Asteroid Discoveries, ApJ, 996, L33, doi:
10.3847/2041-8213/ae2a30
L. P. Guy et al. (2025)
Guy, L. P., Bechtol, K., Bellm, E., et al. 2025, Rubin Observatory Plans for an Early Science Program, Technical Note RTN-011, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, doi:
10.71929/rubin/2584021
K. N. Hainline et al. (2024)
Hainline, K. N., Helton, J. M., Johnson, B. D., et al. 2024, Brown Dwarf Candidates in the JADES and CEERS Extragalactic Surveys, ApJ, 964, 66, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ad20d1
K. N. Hainline et al. (2025)
Hainline, K. N., Maiolino, R., Juodžbalis, I., et al. 2025, An Investigation into the Selection and Colors of Little Red Dots and Active Galactic Nuclei, ApJ, 979, 138, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ad9920
C. R. Harris et al. (2020)
Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al. 2020, Array programming with NumPy, Nature, 585, 357, doi:
10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2
E. J. Honaker & J. E. Gizis (2025)
Honaker, E. J., & Gizis, J. E. 2025, Simulating Solar Neighborhood Brown Dwarfs. I. The Luminosity Function above and below the Galactic Plane, ApJ, 985, 48, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/adc689
J. D. Hunter (2007)
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment, Computing in Science & Engineering, 9, 90, doi:
10.1109/MCSE.2007.55
Ž. Ivezić et al. (2019)
Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., et al. 2019, LSST: From Science Drivers to Reference Design and Anticipated Data Products, ApJ, 873, 111, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ab042c
H. R. A. Jones & T. Tsuji (1997)
Jones, H. R. A., & Tsuji, T. 1997, Spectral Evidence for Dust in Late-Type M Dwarfs, ApJ, 480, L39, doi:
10.1086/310619
M. Jurić et al. (2008)
Jurić, M., Ivezić, Ž., Brooks, A., et al. 2008, The Milky Way Tomography with SDSS. I. Stellar Number Density Distribution, ApJ, 673, 864, doi:
10.1086/523619
J. D. Kirkpatrick (2005)
Kirkpatrick, J. D. 2005, New Spectral Types L and T, ARA&A, 43, 195, doi:
10.1146/annurev.astro.42.053102.134017
J. D. Kirkpatrick et al. (1999)
Kirkpatrick, J. D., Reid, I. N., Liebert, J., et al. 1999, Dwarfs Cooler than “M“: The Definition of Spectral Type “L” Using Discoveries from the 2 Micron All-Sky Survey (2MASS), ApJ, 519, 802, doi:
10.1086/307414
J. D. Kirkpatrick et al. (2010)
Kirkpatrick, J. D., Looper, D. L., Burgasser, A. J., et al. 2010, Discoveries from a Near-infrared Proper Motion Survey Using Multi-epoch Two Micron All-Sky Survey Data, ApJS, 190, 100, doi:
10.1088/0067-0049/190/1/100
J. D. Kirkpatrick et al. (2011)
Kirkpatrick, J. D., Cushing, M. C., Gelino, C. R., et al. 2011, The First Hundred Brown Dwarfs Discovered by the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE), ApJS, 197, 19, doi:
10.1088/0067-0049/197/2/19
J. D. Kirkpatrick et al. (2021)
Kirkpatrick, J. D., Gelino, C. R., Faherty, J. K., et al. 2021, The Field Substellar Mass Function Based on the Full-sky 20 pc Census of 525 L, T, and Y Dwarfs, ApJS, 253, 7, doi:
10.3847/1538-4365/abd107
J. D. Kirkpatrick et al. (2024)
Kirkpatrick, J. D., Marocco, F., Gelino, C. R., et al. 2024, The Initial Mass Function Based on the Full-sky 20 pc Census of
∼
\sim
3600 Stars and Brown Dwarfs, ApJS, 271, 55, doi:
10.3847/1538-4365/ad24e2
S. S. Kumar (1962)
Kumar, S. S. 1962, Study of Degeneracy in Very Light Stars., Astronomical Journal, 67, 579, doi:
10.1086/108658
A. Lawrence et al. (2012)
Lawrence, A., Warren, S. J., Almaini, O., et al. 2012, VizieR Online Data Catalog: UKIDSS-DR8 LAS, GCS and DXS Surveys (Lawrence+ 2012),, VizieR On-line Data Catalog: II/314. Originally published in: 2007MNRAS.379.1599L; 2012yCat.2314….0U
M. C. Liu et al. (2016)
Liu, M. C., Dupuy, T. J., & Allers, K. N. 2016, The Hawaii Infrared Parallax Program. II. Young Ultracool Field Dwarfs, ApJ, 833, 96, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/833/1/96
LSST Science Collaboration et al. (2009)
LSST Science Collaboration, Abell, P. A., Allison, J., et al. 2009, LSST Science Book, Version 2.0, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:0912.0201, doi:
10.48550/arXiv.0912.0201
K. L. Luhman et al. (2024)
Luhman, K. L., Tremblin, P., Alves de Oliveira, C., et al. 2024, JWST/NIRSpec Observations of the Coldest Known Brown Dwarf, AJ, 167, 5, doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/ad0b72
J. T. Mackereth et al. (2019)
Mackereth, J. T., Schiavon, R. P., Pfeffer, J., et al. 2019, The origin of accreted stellar halo populations in the Milky Way using APOGEE, Gaia, and the EAGLE simulations, MNRAS, 482, 3426, doi:
10.1093/mnras/sty2955
K. Malanchev et al. (2025)
Malanchev, K., DeLucchi, M., Caplar, N., et al. 2025, Variability-finding in Rubin Data Preview 1 with LSDB, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2506.23955, doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2506.23955
E. Manjavacas et al. (2024)
Manjavacas, E., Tremblin, P., Birkmann, S., et al. 2024, Medium-resolution 0.97–5.3
μ
\mu
m Spectra of Very Young Benchmark Brown Dwarfs with NIRSpec on Board the James Webb Space Telescope, AJ, 167, 168, doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/ad2938
F. Marocco et al. (2021)
Marocco, F., Eisenhardt, P. R. M., Fowler, J. W., et al. 2021, The CatWISE2020 Catalog, ApJS, 253, 8, doi:
10.3847/1538-4365/abd805
E. L. Martín et al. (1999)
Martín, E. L., Delfosse, X., Basri, G., et al. 1999, Spectroscopic Classification of Late-M and L Field Dwarfs, AJ, 118, 2466, doi:
10.1086/301107
E. L. Martín et al. (2018)
Martín, E. L., Lodieu, N., Pavlenko, Y., & Béjar, V. J. S. 2018, The Lithium Depletion Boundary and the Age of the Hyades Cluster, ApJ, 856, 40, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/aaaeb8
A. Mazzi et al. (2024)
Mazzi, A., Girardi, L., Trabucchi, M., et al. 2024, Dissecting the Gaia HR diagram - II. The vertical structure of the star formation history across the solar cylinder, MNRAS, 527, 583, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stad2952
A. Mohandasan et al. (2025)
Mohandasan, A., Smart, R. L., Reyl\’e, C., et al. 2025, Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1) Ultracool dwarfs in the Euclid Deep Field North, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2503.22559, doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2503.22559
C. V. Morley et al. (2014)
Morley, C. V., Marley, M. S., Fortney, J. J., et al. 2014, Water Clouds in Y Dwarfs and Exoplanets, ApJ, 787, 78, doi:
10.1088/0004-637X/787/1/78
C. V. Morley et al. (2024)
Morley, C. V., Mukherjee, S., Marley, M. S., et al. 2024, The Sonora Substellar Atmosphere Models. III. Diamondback: Atmospheric Properties, Spectra, and Evolution for Warm Cloudy Substellar Objects, ApJ, 975, 59, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ad71d5
NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory (2025a)
NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory. 2025a, Legacy Survey of Space and Time Data Preview 1: Source searchable catalog [Data set], NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, doi:
10.71929/RUBIN/2570323
NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory (2025b)
NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory. 2025b, Legacy Survey of Space and Time Data Preview 1: Object searchable catalog [Data set], NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, doi:
10.71929/RUBIN/2570325
NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory Team et al. (2025)
NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory Team, Acero-Cuellar, T., Acosta, E., et al. 2025, RTN-095: The Vera C. Rubin Observatory Data Preview 1,, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory Technical Report doi:
10.71929/RUBIN/2570536
P. Patapis et al. (2025)
Patapis, P., Morales-Calderón, M., Arabhavi, A. M., et al. 2025, JWST/MIRI observations of the young TWA 27 system: Hydrocarbon disk chemistry, silicate clouds, and evidence of a circumplanetary disk, A&A, 704, A5, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202556296
C. L. Phillips et al. (2024)
Phillips, C. L., Faherty, J. K., Burningham, B., et al. 2024, Retrieving Young Cloudy L Dwarfs: A Nearby Planetary-mass Companion BD+60 1417B and its Isolated Red Twin W0047, ApJ, 972, 172, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ad5d57
M. N. Porter et al. (2025)
Porter, M. N., Tucker, D. L., Smith, J. A., & Adair, C. L. 2025, Photometric Transformation Relations for the LSST Data Preview 1, Technical Note RTN-099, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, doi:
10.71929/rubin/3006074
C. Rodrigo & E. Solano (2020)
Rodrigo, C., & Solano, E. 2020, The SVO Filter Profile Service, in XIV.0 Scientific Meeting (virtual) of the Spanish Astronomical Society, 182
C. Rodrigo et al. (2012)
Rodrigo, C., Solano, E., & Bayo, A. 2012, SVO Filter Profile Service Version 1.0,, IVOA Working Draft 15 October 2012 doi:
10.5479/ADS/bib/2012ivoa.rept.1015R
C. Rodrigo et al. (2024)
Rodrigo, C., Cruz, P., Aguilar, J. F., et al. 2024, Photometric segregation of dwarf and giant FGK stars using the SVO Filter Profile Service and photometric tools, A&A, 689, A93, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202449998
B. Rojas-Ayala et al. (2012)
Rojas-Ayala, B., Covey, K. R., Muirhead, P. S., & Lloyd, J. P. 2012, Metallicity and Temperature Indicators in M Dwarf K-band Spectra: Testing New and Updated Calibrations with Observations of 133 Solar Neighborhood M Dwarfs, ApJ, 748, 93, doi:
10.1088/0004-637X/748/2/93
A. J. Romanowsky et al. (2025)
Romanowsky, A. J., Tang, Y., & Bundy, K. A. 2025, Morphology and Stellar Populations of a Candidate Ultra-diffuse Galaxy in Early Euclid and Rubin Imaging, Research Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 9, 181, doi:
10.3847/2515-5172/adee10
Rubin Observatory Science Pipelines Developers (2025)
Rubin Observatory Science Pipelines Developers. 2025, The LSST Science Pipelines Software: Optical Survey Pipeline Reduction and Analysis Environment, Project Science Technical Note PSTN-019, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, doi:
10.71929/rubin/2570545
R. E. Ryan et al. (2017)
Ryan, Jr., R. E., Thorman, P. A., Schmidt, S. J., et al. 2017, The Effect of Atmospheric Cooling on Vertical Velocity Dispersion and Density Distribution of Brown Dwarfs, ApJ, 847, 53, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/aa85ea
A. Sanghi et al. (2023)
Sanghi, A., Liu, M. C., Best, W. M. J., et al. 2023, The Hawaii Infrared Parallax Program. VI. The Fundamental Properties of 1000+ Ultracool Dwarfs and Planetary-mass Objects Using Optical to Mid-infrared Spectral Energy Distributions and Comparison to BT-Settl and ATMO 2020 Model Atmospheres, ApJ, 959, 63, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/acff66
D. Saumon & M. S. Marley (2008)
Saumon, D., & Marley, M. S. 2008, The Evolution of L and T Dwarfs in Color-Magnitude Diagrams, ApJ, 689, 1327, doi:
10.1086/592734
S. J. Schmidt et al. (2016)
Schmidt, S. J., Shappee, B. J., Gagné, J., et al. 2016, ASASSN-16ae: A POWERFUL WHITE-LIGHT FLARE ON AN EARLY-L DWARF, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 828, L22, doi:
10.3847/2041-8205/828/2/l22
A. C. Schneider et al. (2023)
Schneider, A. C., Munn, J. A., Vrba, F. J., et al. 2023, Astrometry and Photometry for
≈
\approx
1000 L, T, and Y Dwarfs from the UKIRT Hemisphere Survey, AJ, 166, 103, doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/ace9bf
M. F. Skrutskie et al. (2006)
Skrutskie, M. F., Cutri, R. M., Stiening, R., et al. 2006, The Two Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS), AJ, 131, 1163, doi:
10.1086/498708
N. Skrzypek et al. (2015)
Skrzypek, N., Warren, S. J., Faherty, J. K., et al. 2015, Photometric brown-dwarf classification. I. A method to identify and accurately classify large samples of brown dwarfs without spectroscopy, A&A, 574, A78, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201424570
R. L. Smart et al. (2017)
Smart, R. L., Marocco, F., Caballero, J. A., et al. 2017, The Gaia ultracool dwarf sample - I. Known L and T dwarfs and the first Gaia data release, MNRAS, 469, 401, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stx800
R. L. Smart et al. (2019)
Smart, R. L., Marocco, F., Sarro, L. M., et al. 2019, The Gaia ultracool dwarf sample - II. Structure at the end of the main sequence, MNRAS, 485, 4423, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stz678
M. B. Taylor (2005)
Taylor, M. B. 2005, TOPCAT & STIL: Starlink Table/VOTable Processing Software, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 347, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XIV, ed. P. Shopbell, M. Britton, & R. Ebert, 29
E. K. Urbach et al. (2025)
Urbach, E. K., Fagrelius, P., Mueller, F., & Amouroux, N. 2025, Collimated Beam Projector Installation and ComCam Testing, Commissioning Technical Note SITCOMTN-152, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory.
https://sitcomtn-152.lsst.io/
J. M. Vos et al. (2023)
Vos, J. M., Burningham, B., Faherty, J. K., et al. 2023, Patchy Forsterite Clouds in the Atmospheres of Two Highly Variable Exoplanet Analogs, ApJ, 944, 138, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/acab58
M. Žerjal et al. (2025)
Žerjal, M., Dominguez-Tagle, C., Vitas, N., et al. 2025, Euclid: Quick Data Release (Q1) – A photometric search for ultracool dwarfs in the Euclid Deep Fields, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2503.22497, doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2503.22497
Y. Wang et al. (2025)
Wang, Y., Bellm, E. C., Hynes, R. I., et al. 2025, Optical Counterparts to X-ray sources in LSST DP1, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2507.14400, doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2507.14400
A. A. West et al. (2004)
West, A. A., Hawley, S. L., Walkowicz, L. M., et al. 2004, Spectroscopic Properties of Cool Stars in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey: An Analysis of Magnetic Activity and a Search for Subdwarfs, AJ, 128, 426, doi:
10.1086/421364
E. L. Wright et al. (2010)
Wright, E. L., Eisenhardt, P. R. M., Mainzer, A. K., et al. 2010, The Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE): Mission Description and Initial On-orbit Performance, AJ, 140, 1868, doi:
10.1088/0004-6256/140/6/1868
D. G. York et al. (2000)
York, D. G., Adelman, J., Anderson, Jr., J. E., et al. 2000, The Sloan Digital Sky Survey: Technical Summary, AJ, 120, 1579, doi:
10.1086/301513
Z. Zhang & Y. Li (2025)
Zhang, Z., & Li, Y. 2025, Ultracool dwarf Science with MachIne LEarning (USMILE). I. Scalable Tree-based Models for Photometric Spectral Classification and New Discoveries from LSST Data Preview 1 and Euclid Quick Data Release 1, AJ, 170, 360, doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/ae100b
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA