LStein: A new approach to visualizing sparse 2.5-dimensional data.1footnote 1footnoteFootnotefootnotesFootnotes1footnote 1Source code is available on GitHub: https://github.com/TheRedElement/LStein.
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
2
Traditional methods
2.1
Multi-panel 2.5D visualization
2.2
Single-panel 2.5D visualization
2.3
Single panel with offset
2.4
3D-plot
3
Design principles
3.1
Backends
3.2
Customizations
3.3
Web integration
3.4
Data comparisons
4
Implementation
4.1
Data-series projection
4.1.1
Commonalities across projection methods
Min-max-scaling
Panelbounds
Panel-position computation
4.1.2
Projection method:
theta
4.1.3
Projection method:
y
4.1.4
Adding context from the original data
4.2
Note on projection effects
5
Extension to other fields
5.1
Spectral evolution over time
5.2
Radio Astronomy
5.3
Learning curves
5.4
Spiking neurons
6
Known issues and workarounds
6.1
Error bars
6.2
Series types
6.3
Inverting
thetaticks
6.4
Log scale
6.5
Backend subtleties
7
Further development
8
Summary
References
A
Arbitrary backends
B
Loading a
JSON
file in
JavaScript
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2604.24034v1 [astro-ph.IM] 27 Apr 2026
LStein: A new approach to visualizing sparse 2.5-dimensional data.
1
1
1
Source code is available on
GitHub
:
https://github.com/TheRedElement/LStein
.
Lukas Steinwender
lsteinwender@swin.edu.au
https://lukassteinwender.com
Anais Möller
amoller@swin.edu.au
Christopher J. Fluke
cfluke@swin.edu.au
Abstract
Visualization of high-dimensional data is crucial to retrieve all the knowledge that is contained within a dataset.
Effective and informative presentation of three-dimensional data via a two-dimensional medium is challenging, especially if the dataset more closely resembles a 2.5-dimensional (2.5D) entity due to sparse sampling.
We present
LStein
(
Linking Series to envision information neatly
), a novel visualisation approach implemented in
Python
, in an attempt to solve this challenge.
Inspired by the astrophysical application of displaying photometric timeseries in multiple passbands with minimal loss of information, we compare our method to traditional approaches.
While astronomy – specifically multi-passband visualisation for
lightcurves
obtained with the
Rubin Observatory
– serves as the principal driver for the design, we demonstrate that
LStein
can be used in any context with 2.5D datasets from radio astronomy to
machine learning
hyperparameter search visualization.
LStein
can be installed from
GitHub
(
https://github.com/TheRedElement/LStein
).
keywords:
Astronomical instrumentation, methods and techniques , Methods: data analysis , Visualisation application domains: Scientific visualisation , Visualisation application domains: Visual analytics , Visualisation application domains: Information visualisation
†
†
journal:
Astronomy and Computing
\affiliation
[cas]organization=Centre for Astrophysics & Supercomputing, Swinburne University of Technology,
addressline=John Street,
city=Melbourne,
postcode=3122,
state=Victoria,
country=Australia
\affiliation
[ozgrav]organization=ARC Centre of Excellence for Gravitational Wave Discovery (OzGrav),
addressline=John Street,
city=Hawthorn,
postcode=3122,
state=Victoria,
country=Australia
1
Introduction
Data-analysis and knowledge-discovery is intimately linked to visual inspection.
While 2-dimensional (2D) datasets are easily visualized using physical or digital 2D media without loss of information, this becomes more challenging for higher dimensions
(Fluke et al.,
2009
)
.
Consider 3-dimemsional (3D) datasets where projection effects distort the displayed information when presented in a 2D medium.
While interpolation can mitigate some of the lost information by linking close data points, for sparse 3D datasets this is a non-trivial process.
The example inspiring this work is time-dependent photometric observations in optical astronomy.
Here, astronomers observe the Universe in passbands (filters).
We show transmission curves from the
Vera C. Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time
(
Rubin LSST
, Ivezić et al.,
2019
; Hambleton et al.,
2023
)
passbands in
Fig.
˜
1
.
Observing a signal over time will result in a unique curve for every passband (
Fig.
˜
2
).
These brightness variations over time in a specific passband are referred to as
lightcurve (LC)
.
The curves shown in
Fig.
˜
2
are from
ELAsTiCC
(
Extended LSST Astronomical Time-series Classification Challenge
, Knop and ELAsTiCC Team,
2023
)
, a dataset of simulated
LCs
for
Rubin LSST
.
Figure 1:
Transmission curves of the
Rubin LSST
filter set.
Note, that the passbands are not spaced uniformly in wavelength.
Transmission data taken from
sncosmo
(Barbary et al.,
2025
)
.
We denote a passbands’ average wavelength
(following Koornneef et al.,
1986
)
with a dashed, vertical line.
Figure 2:
Simulated
LC
of an
ELAsTiCC
SN
.
Each panel shows the variation in Flux (arbitrary units, without errors) over time for each of the passbands from
Fig.
˜
1
.
Note the different scales of the
y
y
-axes, which are necessary to see the
LC
morphologies.
The only location where the passband-separation is recorded is in the legend.
Considering
Fig.
˜
1
it is clear that the use of passbands only sparsely samples the wavelength dimension.
Furthermore, every measurement in a specific passband is a summary of the entire passbands transmission region, which is unique for each passband and can even overlap with other bands.
Surprisingly, this relation in wavelength-space is often overlooked, but essential to consider when making claims about the physics governing an object’s behavior.
This is the case because the wavelength is intimately tied to physical phenomena, and the closeness of different passbands can give insight into the true landscape of wavelength-space.
Examples for the many science cases where the wavelength-dependent properties of photometric observations are crucial include supernova classification
(Möller and de Boissière,
2020
; Fraga et al.,
2024
; Möller et al.,
2025
)
, asteroseismology
(Balona and
Evers,
1999
; Bellinger et al.,
2024
; Fritzewski et al.,
2025
)
, exoplanet analysis
(Peláez-Torres et al.,
2024
)
, and tidal disruption event discovery
(Llamas Lanza et al.,
2026
)
.
To address the issues that arise when visualizing time-dependent photometric observations, we propose
LStein
, a new, deterministic, way to visualize 2.5-dimensional (2.5D) data in two dimensions.
The 2D part is hereby the combination of time and brightness in our example.
Dimension 0.5 corresponds to wavelength.
We chose this terminology since the data has certainly more than 2 dimensions, but not quite 3 due to its sparseness in wavelength.
Our nomenclature shall not be confused with fractal dimensions
(i.e., Mandelbrot,
1967
)
.
An example application of
LStein
can be found in
Fig.
˜
3
.
Figure 3:
Example for
LStein
plots.
The left panel shows the application to a
SN
LC
, the right panel to a
TDE
.
Both
LCs
are from
ELAsTiCC
(Knop and ELAsTiCC Team,
2023
)
.
The azimuthal axis (inner radius) encodes passband wavelength, the radial axis contains time, and the azimuthal sectors (outer axis) brightness.
Sectors, denoted by thick black lines, are interpreted as individual panels.
We also show representative curves in the right panel to demonstrate the capability of overplotting different series.
To demonstrate customizability, we invert the time-, and flux-axis and adjust the space occupied by the plot for the right panel.
This paper is organized as follows:
In
Sec.
˜
2
we compare different traditional methods and highlight their shortcomings.
Section
˜
3
outlines the design principles that guided the implementation (
Sec.
˜
4
) of
LStein
.
We demonstrate the broader adaptability and flexibility of
LStein
by providing example applications for a range of different fields in
Sec.
˜
5
.
Finally, we summarize known issues with possible solution, and plans for future additions in
Sections
˜
6
and
7
.
2
Traditional methods
We compare different traditional methods for 2.5D visualisation by applying them to
ELAsTiCC
(see
Sec.
˜
1
)
LCs
.
Note, that the same
LCs
are displayed for all comparisons.
Furthermore, keep in mind that colors are not necessary (different markers would suffice to differentiate between data-series) but were applied to make different series easily identifiable across figures.
2.1
Multi-panel 2.5D visualization
A natural approach to visualize a set of
LCs
is to display each passband in a different panel (
Fig.
˜
2
).
While the individual series are nicely distinguishable, the passband information is obscured due to the separation, which detaches the series from the wavelength information.
With this approach, the wavelength spacing of the different passbands is not visualized.
Moreover, as the different data-series are detached from each-other, the viewer has to move from panel to panel to make comparisons of brightness and/or time values.
A further weakpoint of this approach is that certain panels might contain a lot of empty space, if some passbands show stronger recordings (higher brightness values) than others.
This, of course, only applies when all the axes are set to have the same limits (as has been done in
Fig.
˜
2
).
If the axis limits are scaled based on the contained data, another issue occurs: the amplitudes are not comparable anymore.
2.2
Single-panel 2.5D visualization
To address the series-detachment problem of the multi-panel approach (
Sec.
˜
2.1
), the single-panel visualisation displays all the information together.
While this works well with few passbands, it becomes more challenging as the number of passbands increases.
As can be observed in
Fig.
˜
4
, even with only 6 passbands (as is the case for the
Rubin Observatory
) it is hard to disentangle the different data-series.
The wavelength-dependence of the passbands is still not displayed, as the data points are just plotted on top of each other.
Figure 4:
Example for the single panel approach.
The same
SN
and photometry as in
Fig.
˜
2
is shown.
Different colors denote different passbands.
2.3
Single panel with offset
Another method of displaying
LCs
is an extension to
Sec.
˜
2.2
, whereby all data points are plotted within a single panel, but an offset is applied to the respective series reflecting the corresponding passbands’ wavelength.
This ensures that passband information is encoded in the vertical position of the
LC
.
Drawbacks of this approach are that one has to choose between one of the following options:
1.
Display brightness values on the ordinate and hide passband information.
This has the downside that passband information has to be inferred from the relative offset between data-series reference points (e.g., median brightness, brightness-minimum).
Therefore, the viewer is required to factor an additional piece of information into the analysis of the visualized data.
Furthermore, depending on the actual wavelength values, it can easily happen that different series are overlapping, which might lead to confusion.
2.
Display passband information on the ordinate and hide brightness values.
Brightness, more specifically its change, is the main quantity of interest for many astrophysical analyses.
Therefore, we argue that this choice is unsuitable by design.
3.
Display both quantities on the ordinate at the expense of a cluttered ordinate.
One of the main criteria of a good plot is readability.
Too much text-information severely impacts readability of a visualisation and makes it unintuitive.
Therefore, we assert that also this choice is unsuitable in most contexts.
Furthermore, depending on the choice of the offset, it might be hard to get an intuition for the actual brightness values of each
LC
.
Finally, comparing different objects can be very challenging because the passband-information is linked to the vertical offset/brightness information.
Therefore, a series with consistently huge brightness recordings will swallow the passband information, while series with tiny recordings get dominated by passband wavelength.
Figure 5:
Example for displaying all dataseries in a single panel and encoding the wavelength information in the vertical offset.
This particular example uses an offset of
λ
100
\tfrac{\lambda}{100}
, where
λ
\lambda
is the passband wavelength.
The offset is applied to the minimum of each dataseries.
The same
SN
and photometry as in
Fig.
˜
2
is shown.
2.4
3D-plot
Transferring the problem into 3D space allows the inclusion of wavelength information in the display.
However, projection effects, plotting order, overlapping elements, and the fact that not all angles can be displayed hinder the easy interpretation when shared via a 2D medium (see
Fig.
˜
6
for an example).
Seeing as journals are the main medium to share research,
Fluke et al. (
2009
)
attempted to alleviate these issues through the inclusion of interactive elements in
Portable Document Format (PDF)
-documents.
Another way to make 3D visualisation more viable in the 2D publishing setting was explored by
Russeil et al. (
2024
)
, who attempted to add physical meaning to an interpolation and display the result as a smooth surface.
Figure 6:
Example for a 3D visualisation.
We connect points with lines to make their location in 3D space more obvious.
The same
SN
and photometry as in
Fig.
˜
2
is shown.
We note that inherently 3D displays such as virtual reality (VR) via head-mounted displays (HMDs), stereoscopic methods, and 3D printed output do not suffer from the drawbacks outlined for the projection of 3D space to 2D (
Fig.
˜
6
).
A discussion of these techniques is, however, out of the scope of this work because the main media for publishing data are in 2D.
3
Design principles
The goal of
LStein
is to create an
easy to use
,
intuitive
,
customizable
framework for visualizing 2.5D data.
The fundamental idea is to project the 2.5D to 2D while preserving the (sparse) relationships that exist in the 0.5th dimension.
To illustrate the design principles for
LStein
, we use the special case introduced in
Sections
˜
1
and
2
: multi-passband photometric
LCs
.
To keep the terminology general we introduce a new coordinate system and relate our quantities of interest as follows:
time
↦
x
LS
brightness
↦
y
LS
wavelength
↦
θ
LS
.
\displaystyle\begin{split}\text{time}&\mapsto x^{\mathrm{LS}}\\
\text{brightness}&\mapsto y^{\mathrm{LS}}\\
\text{wavelength}&\mapsto\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}\end{split}.
(1)
We achieve the projection, by defining the following:
•
x
LS
x^{\mathrm{LS}}
in radial direction.
•
y
LS
y^{\mathrm{LS}}
in azimuthal direction, but constrained to a sector of the entire
θ
LS
\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}
range.
•
θ
LS
\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}
in azimuthal direction.
Examples for
LStein
plot-layouts are shown in
Fig.
˜
3
.
To set the
θ
LS
\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}
-values in context, we make use of azimuthally-spaced panels.
Specifically, each
θ
LS
\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}
-value is assigned to a panel that reflects its relation to all other
θ
LS
\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}
-values.
Therefore, series that are closer in
θ
LS
\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}
, are also physically plotted closer to each other.
The use of panels also reduces cluttering and makes sure that information such as series-colors or marker-shapes are only supplementary information, rather than serving as a separate data-axis.
We implement
LStein
in
Python
(Van Rossum and Drake,
2009
)
to make sure it is easy to use and adopt.
Another motivating factor for this choice was that
Rubin LSST
and other modern surveys predominantly use
Python
in their pipelines.
Given that
matplotlib
(Hunter,
2007
)
is one of the most popular plotting libraries in
Python
, we opted for a logical flow similar to
matplotlib
’s rendering order:
(a)
creating a figure (called
LSteinCanvas
);
(b)
adding axes/panels (called
LSteinPanel
);
(c)
attaching artists to the axes
2
2
2
Artists are a concept from
matplotlib
, which encompass elements such as lines or scatters.
.
This makes sure that utilization is intuitive, highly customizable, and extendable.
A code example for the standard procedure is shown in
LABEL:lst-lsteinstandard
.
Listing 1:
Standard usage of
LStein
.
We omit arguments for readability and refer to the documentation for details on the object signature.
⬇
1
#import
package
2
from
lstein
import
lstein
3
4
#setup
a
new
canvas
5
LSC
=
lstein
.
LSteinCanvas
(…)
6
7
#add
a
panel
8
LSP
=
LSC
.
add_panel
(
theta
=…)
9
10
#add
artists
(line,
scatter)
to
panel
11
LSP
.
plot
(
xvals
,
yvals
,
…)
12
13
#produce
graphical
output
14
fig
=
lstein
.
draw
(
LSC
)
3.1
Backends
For the user’s convenience, we include implementations for two backends in the package:
matplotlib
and
Plotly
(Plotly Technologies Inc.,
2015
)
.
These can be invoked via
lstein.draw(LSC, backend="matplotlib")
and
lstein.draw(LSC, backend="plotly")
, respectively.
The core-implementation of
LStein
is targeted towards using the
matplotlib
backend because of
matplotlib
’s popularity across the community.
Furthermore,
matplotlib
is lightweight in terms of memory because it is generating static, publication-ready figures.
At the moment there is no interactive implementation of
LStein
using the
matplotlib
backend.
The
Plotly
backend has the advantage of producing interactive figures, which can also easily be incorporated into a web-page (
Sec.
˜
3.3
).
We also added custom listeners in the
Plotly
backend implementation on top of
Plotly
’s default interactive elements.
These display contextual information about the data points through mouse-pointer hovering, making data-exploration easy and intuitive.
If needed, further interactive elements can be included.
However, because
matplotlib
is the core backend, the
Plotly
backend uses a translation of
matplotlib
arguments to the
Plotly
framework.
For that reason, not all arguments will work as expected (
Sec.
˜
6.5
).
Furthermore,
Plotly
can require more memory and time for plotting because of its interactivity.
LStein
is designed to be easily be adapted to arbitrary plotting frameworks beyond
matplotlib
and
Plotly
.
This is achieved by using the
LSteinCanvas
instance as a container that has methods for computing the required axes and projections.
The most basic recipe to use
LStein
with an arbitrary backend (
LABEL:lst-lsteinrecipe
) is shown in
˜
A
.
3.2
Customizations
Both
LSteinCanvas
and
LSteinPanel
can be customized to the user’s liking by passing relevant keyword arguments.
We also provide convenience methods that will automatically create as many panels as needed (unique
θ
LS
\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}
present in
thetavals
).
This usage is outlined in
LABEL:lst-lsteinconvenience
, whereby
thetavals
is a 1D list or array, and
xvals
and
yvals
are lists of arrays (one array for each
θ
LS
\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}
).
Listing 2:
Convenience usage of
LStein
.
We omit arguments for readability and refer to the documentation for details on the object signature.
⬇
1
#import
package
2
from
lstein
import
lstein
3
4
#setup
a
new
canvas
5
LSC
=
lstein
.
LSteinCanvas
(…)
6
7
#add
artists
8
LSC
.
plot
(
thetavals
,
xvals
,
yvals
,
…)
9
10
#produce
graphical
output
11
fig
=
lstein
.
draw
(
LSC
)
Note, that
lstein.draw(...)
is a convenience method to produce graphical output by invoking one of the provided backends (details in
Sec.
˜
3.1
).
Additionally, we output the generated figure instance in the
lstein.draw()
method, enabling access to all low-level children of the backend in use.
Therefore, users are free to adjust the styling and layout of the plot as they please.
3.3
Web integration
Figure 7:
Screenshot of a
LStein
plot integrated into a website.
On the website, the plot is interactive as indicated by the text-box that appears on hovering any data-point.
Web integration is a powerful way to share visualizations and make them available for a broad audience.
LStein
is especially well-suited for this task, as it allows all the relevant information to be displayed in a set amount of space.
The layout of the single panel with offsets approach (
Sec.
˜
2.3
), for example, requires a tradeoff for many values of
θ
LS
\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}
:
Less visible
LC
-features, or an increase in the figures vertical size.
Due to the
2.5
​
D
↦
2
​
D
\mathrm{2.5D}\mapsto\mathrm{2D}
projection,
LStein
even allows the artificial amplification of features, by placing them further away from the canvas-origin.
Web integration of
LStein
also presents an easy way to share interactive versions of a created plot.
Through the implementation of the
Plotly
backend, we allow an easy way for users to create interactive plots.
These can be saved in a way that allows integration into a website
3
3
3
An example for a
LStein
plot incorporated in a web-page can be found at
https://lukassteinwender.com/pages/software#lstein
(
Fig.
˜
7
).
Creating an interactive web element is as easy as
(a)
using the
write_json()
functions from the
plotly.io
module, which generates a
JSON
-file (
Java Script Object Notation
);
(b)
loading the saved
JSON
-file in
JavaScript
;
(c)
using
Plotly
within
JavaScript
to generate the plot (code in
LABEL:lst-plotfromjson
).
We are currently collaborating with the
Fink
broker
(not an acronym, Möller et al.,
2021
)
to integrate
LStein
into their
Fink
-portal
4
4
4
ztf.fink-portal.org
,
lsst.fink-portal.org
.
Fink
is one of the
Rubin LSST
community brokers that receives the time-domain data-stream, processes it, and supplies enriched and filtered data publicly to the community.
The inclusion of
LStein
will allow users of
Fink
to get a different, supplementary view on data generated by
Rubin LSST
.
3.4
Data comparisons
Finally, we aimed to enable an easy comparison between different data-series/instances of
LStein
.
This is achieved in several ways.
First, the high level of customizability, for example, defining the displayed range of the
θ
LS
\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}
-axis in combination with the capability of flipping different axes allows for a representation that can be adjusted to fit any specific dataset.
Additionally, the definition of constant ticks on each axis allows comparing different panels with the same layout by flipping back-and-forth between different plots.
4
Implementation
Figure 8:
Definitions of the
LStein
coordinate system.
Gray arcs represent
x
x
-ticks, with
x
LS
x^{\mathrm{LS}}
encoding different tick-values (corresponding to
x
C
x^{\mathrm{C}}
).
Gray ticks on the innermost arc are
θ
\theta
-ticks, the arrow on the innermost arc denotes the direction of
θ
\theta
-ticks.
The
θ
\theta
-ticks don’t necessarily have to align with displayed panels.
The combination of
x
x
-ticks and
θ
\theta
-ticks is referred to as “fundament-grid” of the
LSteinCanvas
.
We denote panel-bounds with thick black lines (rays) connecting the innermost and outermost
x
x
-ticks.
A
LSteinPanel
is then the annular sector enclosed within these panel-bounds.
Gray rays within a
LSteinPanel
represent
y
y
-ticks, where
y
LS
y^{\mathrm{LS}}
encodes the original
y
C
y^{\mathrm{C}}
.
The empty space around the origin of the
LSteinCanvas
is referred to as
x
DZ
LS
x^{\mathrm{LS}}_{\mathrm{DZ}}
(
x
LS
x^{\mathrm{LS}}
-deadzone) and reduces cluttering.
All variables displayed show the actual physical information (
Sec.
˜
4.1.4
) but are plotted using
LS
′
\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}
coordinates (
Tables
˜
1
,
4.1.2
and
4.1.3
).
The plotted data in panels A and B show results of projections using
y_projection_method="theta"
(
Sec.
˜
4.1.2
) and
y_projection_method="y"
(
Sec.
˜
4.1.3
), respectively.
We follow the Pythonic object-oriented approach to ensure readable code and easy debugging, enable testing, and facilitate future extension of the package.
The two main objects that compose
LStein
are
LSteinCanvas
and
LSteinPanel
.
The functionality of
LSteinCanvas
is to draw the annular sectors which define the
x
LS
x^{\mathrm{LS}}
-axis (radial arcs denote
x
x
-ticks) and ticks for the
θ
LS
\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}
-axis (azimuthal direction).
The ticks simultaneously define the bounds for the respective axes.
Figure
˜
8
is a summary of the main elements.
LSteinPanel
, on the other hand, deals with populating
LSteinCanvas
with panels, plotting their
y
y
-ticks and, most importantly, projecting any data-series into the
LStein
coordinate system (
Fig.
˜
8
).
Also here the
y
y
-ticks simultaneously define the axis bounds.
4.1
Data-series projection
We provide two methods for projecting data into the
LStein
coordinate system:
theta
that completes the main projection step in polar coordinates, and
y
that operates in Cartesian coordinates for the main projection step.
In cases where it is crucial that the data is contained in the panel
theta
is preferred, if minimizing distortions is the main concern we recommend using
y
.
The basic idea of both is the same, however, the sequence of operations and some subtleties give different methods the edge in different use cases.
The methods used to project a single point into the
LStein
coordinate system are described in
Sections
˜
4.1.1
,
4.1.2
,
4.1.3
and
4.1.4
.
We summarize the variables used in the projections in
Tables
˜
1
and
8
.
Visualizations to aid the understanding of the different steps can be found in
Figures
˜
9
,
10
and
11
.
Parameters superscribed with
C
\mathrm{C}
denote the original (Cartesian) reference frame of the data.
We superscribe parameters used to actually plot the data points with
LS
′
\mathrm{LS}^{\prime}
and the general
LStein
reference-frame with
LS
\mathrm{LS}
.
The latter includes also the physical relations present in the original reference frame.
Table 1:
Variables used when projecting data points into the
LStein
-context.
The first column denotes the variable’s symbol, the second column provides a brief description.
We denote variables in the Cartesian context with a superscript
C
\mathrm{C}
and variables within the
LStein
-projection with superscript
LS
′
\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}
.
All the
LS
′
\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}
variables have counterparts that encode the actual physical meaning on the final plot (
LS
\mathrm{LS}
, as shown in text).
These
LS
\mathrm{LS}
variables can be thought of as a rescaled version of
LS
′
\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}
to match the input ranges in the Cartesian context.
Variable
Description
Cartesian
x
C
∈
ℝ
x^{\mathrm{C}}\in\mathbb{R}
x
C
x^{\mathrm{C}}
-value of a single observation in Cartesian space.
y
C
∈
ℝ
y^{\mathrm{C}}\in\mathbb{R}
y
C
y^{\mathrm{C}}
-value of a single observation in Cartesian space.
θ
C
∈
ℝ
\theta^{\mathrm{C}}\in\mathbb{R}
0.5-th dimension.
x
min
C
∈
ℝ
x^{\mathrm{C}}_{\min}\in\mathbb{R}
Minimum of
x
C
x^{\mathrm{C}}
. Lower limit of values in
x
C
x^{\mathrm{C}}
.
x
max
C
∈
ℝ
x^{\mathrm{C}}_{\max}\in\mathbb{R}
Maximum of
x
C
x^{\mathrm{C}}
. Upper limit of values in
x
C
x^{\mathrm{C}}
.
y
min
C
∈
ℝ
y^{\mathrm{C}}_{\min}\in\mathbb{R}
Minimum of
y
C
y^{\mathrm{C}}
. Lower limit of values in
y
C
y^{\mathrm{C}}
.
y
max
C
∈
ℝ
y^{\mathrm{C}}_{\max}\in\mathbb{R}
Maximum of
y
C
y^{\mathrm{C}}
. Upper limit of values in
y
C
y^{\mathrm{C}}
.
θ
min
C
∈
ℝ
\theta^{\mathrm{C}}_{\min}\in\mathbb{R}
Minimum of
θ
C
\theta^{\mathrm{C}}
. Lower limit of values in
θ
C
\theta^{\mathrm{C}}
.
θ
max
C
∈
ℝ
\theta^{\mathrm{C}}_{\max}\in\mathbb{R}
Maximum of
θ
C
\theta^{\mathrm{C}}
. Upper limit of values in
θ
C
\theta^{\mathrm{C}}
.
LStein
x
LS
′
∈
[
−
1
,
1
]
x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}\in[-1,1]
Cartesian
x
x
-coordinate that gets plotted in the
LStein
panel.
y
LS
′
∈
[
−
1
,
1
]
y^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}\in[-1,1]
Cartesian
y
y
-coordinate that gets plotted in the
LStein
panel.
θ
LS
′
∈
[
0
,
2
​
π
)
\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}\in[0,2\pi)
Polar
θ
\theta
-coordinate used to determine the panel offset.
x
DZ
LS
′
∈
[
0
,
1
]
x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{\mathrm{DZ}}\in[0,1]
fraction of
|
x
LS
′
|
|x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}|
that is not occupied by any data point.
θ
min
LS
′
∈
[
0
,
2
​
π
)
\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{\min}\in[0,2\pi)
Minimum of
θ
LS
′
\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}
. Position of panel hosting
θ
min
C
\theta^{\mathrm{C}}_{\min}
.
θ
max
LS
′
∈
[
0
,
2
​
π
)
\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{\max}\in[0,2\pi)
Maximum of
θ
LS
′
\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}
. Position of panel hosting
θ
max
C
\theta^{\mathrm{C}}_{\max}
.
Δ
​
θ
LS
′
∈
[
0
,
2
​
π
)
\Delta\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}\in[0,2\pi)
Width of a single panel in the
LStein
plot.
4.1.1
Commonalities across projection methods
The following steps precede all specific projection methods (
Sections
˜
4.1.2
and
4.1.3
).
They can be thought of as preprocessing to make the projection behave as intended.
As such,
Fig.
˜
9
has to be considered as a precursor to
Figures
˜
10
and
11
, when interpreting.
Figure 9:
Visualization of the transformations applied before all other specific projection methods (
Figures
˜
10
and
11
).
Red, solid lines indicate panel-bounds, gray arrows denote a transformation.
The
y
y
-labels refer to the panels’
y
y
-axis (enclosed by red, solid lines).
The red star is a randomly chosen point tracking the data-flow across figures throughout the transformation.
Panel A contains the original data from Cartesian space with example data ranges of
x
C
∈
[
0
,
2
]
x^{\mathrm{C}}\in[0,2]
and
y
C
∈
[
−
2
,
2
]
y^{\mathrm{C}}\in[-2,2]
.
Panel B applies
x
DZ
LS
′
x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{\mathrm{DZ}}
and projects to the
ℓ
∞
\ell_{\infty}
unit ball (
Equations
˜
3
and
4
).
Panel C makes sure that the projected
y
y
-values will fit into the
LStein
-panel (
Eq.
˜
5
).
Min-max-scaling
Arguably the core-piece of
LStein
and used in several steps to achieve the projection.
This operation rescales some value
z
z
into a target-interval
[
z
min
′
,
z
max
′
]
[z^{\prime}_{\min},z^{\prime}_{\max}]
given the original interval it came from
[
z
min
,
z
max
]
[z_{\min},z_{\max}]
:
z
′
=
minmax
​
(
z
,
z
min
′
,
z
max
′
,
z
min
,
z
max
)
=
z
−
z
min
z
max
−
z
min
⋅
(
z
max
′
−
z
min
′
)
+
z
min
′
.
\displaystyle\begin{split}z^{\prime}&=\mathrm{minmax}(z,z^{\prime}_{\min},z^{\prime}_{\max},z_{\min},z_{\max})\\
&=\frac{z-z_{\min}}{z_{\max}-z_{\min}}\cdot(z^{\prime}_{\max}-z^{\prime}_{\min})+z^{\prime}_{\min}\end{split}.
(2)
Panelbounds
The entirety of
LStein
operates inside the closed
ℓ
∞
\ell_{\infty}
unit ball (
{
x
∈
ℝ
2
:
‖
x
‖
∞
≤
1
}
\{x\in\mathbb{R}^{2}:\|x\|_{\infty}\leq 1\}
) to ensure well-behaving of trigonometric functions such as
arctan
\arctan
and
tan
\tan
, and avoid numerical instabilities in fractions.
To achieve this, one has to scale
x
C
x^{\mathrm{C}}
and
y
C
y^{\mathrm{C}}
accordingly.
Scaling
x
C
x^{\mathrm{C}}
is achieved by applying
Eq.
˜
2
:
x
1
LS
′
\displaystyle x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{1}
=
minmax
​
(
x
C
,
x
DZ
LS
′
,
1
,
x
min
C
,
x
max
C
)
.
\displaystyle=\mathrm{minmax}(x^{\mathrm{C}},x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{\mathrm{DZ}},1,x^{\mathrm{C}}_{\min},x^{\mathrm{C}}_{\max}).
(3)
We use
x
DZ
LS
′
x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{\mathrm{DZ}}
as the lower bound to make the plot less cluttered, which results in a region of empty space around the origin of
LStein
(
x
LS
′
x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}
-deadzone, see panel B in
Fig.
˜
9
).
The upper bound is a result of operating in the
ℓ
∞
\ell_{\infty}
unit ball.
As for the adjustment of
y
C
y^{\mathrm{C}}
, we need to consider that
LStein
-panels are sectors of an annulus (see
Figures
˜
3
and
8
for examples).
Therefore, the range occupied by
y
y
-values at any given
x
x
-value has to scale linearly with the distance from the origin.
This is achieved in two steps.
First,
y
C
y^{\mathrm{C}}
is rescaled to the unit-range (
Fig.
˜
9
, panel B):
y
0
LS
′
\displaystyle y^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{0}
=
minmax
​
(
y
C
,
0
,
1
,
y
min
C
,
y
max
C
)
.
\displaystyle=\mathrm{minmax}(y^{\mathrm{C}},0,1,y^{\mathrm{C}}_{\min},y^{\mathrm{C}}_{\max}).
(4)
Consecutively
x
1
LS
′
x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{1}
(
Eq.
˜
3
) is applied to
Eq.
˜
4
as a scaling factor (
Fig.
˜
9
, panel C):
y
1
LS
′
\displaystyle y^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{1}
=
y
0
LS
′
⋅
x
1
LS
′
.
\displaystyle=y^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{0}\cdot x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{1}.
(5)
Panel-position computation
To compute the correct placement of a panel, one converts the input
θ
C
\theta^{\mathrm{C}}
to an angle (
θ
LS
′
\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}
) that reflects the input range.
This is once more a matter of applying
Eq.
˜
2
:
θ
LS
′
\displaystyle\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}
=
minmax
​
(
θ
C
,
θ
min
LS
′
,
θ
max
LS
′
,
θ
min
C
,
θ
max
C
)
.
\displaystyle=\mathrm{minmax}(\theta^{\mathrm{C}},\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{\min},\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{\max},\theta^{\mathrm{C}}_{\min},\theta^{\mathrm{C}}_{\max}).
(6)
4.1.2
Projection method:
theta
Figure 10:
Steps for the projection into
LStein
frame of reference using
y_projection_method="theta"
as described in
Sec.
˜
4.1.2
.
Red, solid lines indicate panel-bounds, gray arrows denote a transformation.
We represent
Δ
​
θ
LS
′
\Delta\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}
(
Tab.
˜
1
) with the black double-headed arrow.
For panels A and B the
θ
\theta
-labels refer to the panels’
θ
\theta
-axis (enclosed by red, solid lines).
The red star is the same randomly chosen point as in
Fig.
˜
9
, tracking the data-flow across figures throughout the transformation.
Panel A is a transformation to polar coordinates.
Panel B applies
Eq.
˜
2
to place the data to the correct position (
Eq.
˜
8
). The panel is placed at
θ
LS
′
\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}
(
Eq.
˜
6
).
Panel C shows the conversion back to Cartesian space for plotting as required by
matplotlib
and
Plotly
(
Eq.
˜
9
).
All panels use
x
1
LS
′
x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{1}
as the value for
r
r
when converting between Cartesian and polar coordinates to reduce projection effects in the
x
x
-direction.
This projection method basically guarantees that the plotted data will be contained in the corresponding
LSteinPanel
, which is especially useful for space-critical applications (e.g., web-displays,
Sec.
˜
3.3
).
The tradeoff is that the projection effects are stronger compared to using
y
(
Sec.
˜
4.1.3
) as projection method.
For this projection method we start by transforming
Equations
˜
3
and
5
into polar coordinates, as this is the frame of reference for placing the data points into the correct panels (
Fig.
˜
10
, panel A):
θ
1
P
=
arctan
⁡
(
y
1
LS
′
x
1
LS
′
)
,
\displaystyle\theta^{\mathrm{P}}_{1}=\arctan\left(\frac{y^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{1}}{x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{1}}\right),
(7)
where the superscript
P
\mathrm{P}
denotes a value in polar coordinates.
Rescaling the result from
Eq.
˜
7
to the correct panel-bounds using
Eq.
˜
2
places the data points at the desired position (panel B in
Fig.
˜
10
):
θ
2
P
=
minmax
​
(
θ
1
P
,
θ
LS
′
−
Δ
​
θ
LS
′
2
,
θ
LS
′
+
Δ
​
θ
LS
′
2
,
0
,
π
4
)
,
\displaystyle\begin{split}\theta^{\mathrm{P}}_{2}=&\mathrm{minmax}(\theta^{\mathrm{P}}_{1},\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}-\frac{\Delta\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}}{2},\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}+\frac{\Delta\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}}{2},0,\frac{\pi}{4})\end{split},
(8)
where
0
and
π
4
\tfrac{\pi}{4}
originate from choosing to operate in the closed
ℓ
∞
\ell_{\infty}
unit ball (
arctan
⁡
(
0
1
)
\arctan\left(\tfrac{0}{1}\right)
and
arctan
⁡
(
1
1
)
\arctan\left(\tfrac{1}{1}\right)
, respectively).
Depending on the implementation of
arctan
\arctan
, an additional offset of
π
\pi
might be necessary.
Finally, we convert back to Cartesian coordinates for plotting (
Fig.
˜
10
, panel C):
x
LS
′
=
x
1
LS
′
,
y
LS
′
=
x
LS
′
⋅
sin
⁡
(
θ
2
P
)
.
\displaystyle\begin{split}x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}&=x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{1},\\
y^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}&=x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}\cdot\sin(\theta^{\mathrm{P}}_{2})\end{split}.
(9)
Take note that we do not use the polar coordinates’ radius but rather
x
LS
′
x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}
for the back-conversion.
This is done to minimize projection effects in
x
x
-direction, since
y
y
shall be encoded almost entirely in the angular part.
4.1.3
Projection method:
y
Figure 11:
Steps of the projection using
y_projection_method="y"
.
Red, solid lines indicate panel-bounds, gray arrows denote a transformation.
We represent
Δ
​
y
max
C
\Delta y_{\max}^{\mathrm{C}}
(
Eq.
˜
11
) with the black double-headed arrow.
The red star is the same randomly chosen point as in
Fig.
˜
9
, tracking the data-flow across figures throughout the transformation.
For panels A and B the
y
y
-labels refer to the panels’
y
y
-axis (enclosed by red, solid lines).
Panel A projects the data to the correct angular width in Cartesian units (first term in
Eq.
˜
12
).
Panel B centers the projected sector, by applying the second term of
Eq.
˜
12
to the result from panel A.
Panel C places the data to the correct position by applying a rotation (
Equations
˜
13
and
14
).
Contrary to
Sec.
˜
4.1.2
(using
theta
as the projection method) one accepts that some points might overflow the panel for the advantage of minimzing distortion of the data.
We recommend using this method when the ranges of the data-series’
x
x
- and
y
y
-values are on completely different orders of magnitude, as projecting using
y
circumvents the use of
arctan
\arctan
with a fraction of
x
x
and
y
y
.
In this context we aim to make all our projections (specifically the projection into the correct panel bounds) in carthesian space and only use polar coordinates for the panel placement.
To do so, we project
y
1
LS
′
y^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{1}
from
Eq.
˜
5
into the correct angular width (
Δ
​
θ
LS
′
\Delta\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}
).
We start by computing the width of the annulus sector at any given
x
1
LS
′
x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{1}
in Cartesian coordinates (
Δ
​
y
C
\Delta y^{\mathrm{C}}
):
Δ
​
y
C
\displaystyle\Delta y^{\mathrm{C}}
=
x
1
LS
′
⋅
tan
⁡
(
Δ
​
θ
LS
′
)
.
\displaystyle=x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{1}\cdot\tan(\Delta\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}).
(10)
Next, we determine the actual upper bound of the panel to ensure the data points get scaled correctly, even if they do not fill the entire axis-range:
Δ
​
y
max
C
\displaystyle\Delta y^{\mathrm{C}}_{\max}
=
max
⁡
(
max
⁡
(
Δ
​
y
C
)
,
1
⋅
tan
⁡
(
Δ
​
θ
LS
′
)
)
.
\displaystyle=\max\left(\max(\Delta y^{\mathrm{C}}),1\cdot\tan(\Delta\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}})\right).
(11)
The second argument in the
max
\max
is hereby simply the upper bound of the panel based on the provided axis limits.
We can omit the contribution of the radius (set it to
1
1
) because we operate in the
ℓ
∞
\ell_{\infty}
unit ball.
Consecutively, we combine
Equations
˜
10
,
11
and
5
to get our data points projected into the
LStein
-panel:
y
2
LS
′
\displaystyle y^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{2}
=
Δ
​
y
max
C
⋅
y
1
LS
′
−
Δ
​
y
C
2
.
\displaystyle=\Delta y^{\mathrm{C}}_{\max}\cdot y^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{1}-\frac{\Delta y^{\mathrm{C}}}{2}.
(12)
The last term in
Eq.
˜
12
is needed to center the panel around
θ
LS
\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}
(
Fig.
˜
11
, panels A and B).
Finally, for the panel placement, we operate in polar coordinates and offset the azimuthal angle with the correct value
θ
LS
′
\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}
.
r
3
P
=
(
x
1
LS
′
)
2
+
(
y
2
LS
′
)
2
,
θ
3
P
=
arctan
⁡
(
y
2
LS
′
x
1
LS
′
)
+
θ
LS
′
.
\displaystyle\begin{split}r_{3}^{\mathrm{P}}&=\sqrt{\left(x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{1}\right)^{2}+\left(y^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{2}\right)^{2}},\\
\theta_{3}^{\mathrm{P}}&=\arctan\left(\frac{y^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{2}}{x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}_{1}}\right)+\theta^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}.\end{split}
(13)
Once again, an offset of
π
\pi
might be needed depending on the implementation of
arctan
\arctan
.
Converting back to Cartesian coordinates gives us the values that can be plotted (
Fig.
˜
11
, panel C):
x
LS
′
=
r
3
P
⋅
cos
⁡
(
θ
3
P
)
,
y
LS
′
=
r
3
P
⋅
sin
⁡
(
θ
3
P
)
.
\displaystyle\begin{split}x^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}&=r_{3}^{\mathrm{P}}\cdot\cos(\theta_{3}^{\mathrm{P}}),\\
y^{\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}}&=r_{3}^{\mathrm{P}}\cdot\sin(\theta_{3}^{\mathrm{P}})\end{split}.
(14)
Alternatively to
Eq.
˜
13
one could remain in Cartesian space and use a rotation matrix to achieve the same result.
4.1.4
Adding context from the original data
Based on the previous sections all values that are displayed using
LStein
are constrained to the
ℓ
∞
\ell_{\infty}
unit ball.
To add the physical context originally recorded by the inputs (
x
C
x^{\mathrm{C}}
,
y
C
y^{\mathrm{C}}
,
θ
C
\theta^{\mathrm{C}}
) back to the visualization, we adjust the axis ticks accordingly.
This means, that we also apply
Eq.
˜
2
to all the axis ticks provided by the user to convert their locations to the
LS
′
\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}
coordinate system.
Then it is just a matter of under-plotting them as lines and arcs behind the projected data from
Sections
˜
4.1.2
and
4.1.3
.
This concludes our final transformation:
LS
′
↦
LS
\mathrm{LS^{\prime}}\mapsto\mathrm{LS}
.
We show the final result and a visualization of the
LStein
grid and axis ticks in
Fig.
˜
8
.
4.2
Note on projection effects
Comparing
Figures
˜
10
,
11
and
8
one can immediately see that the two methods do not yield the same results.
This is intended and has to be taken into account when plotting your data.
The slight distortion in
Fig.
˜
10
(panel A of
Fig.
˜
8
) is not present in
Fig.
˜
11
(panel B of
Fig.
˜
8
).
Note, however, that the distortion almost guarantees that the data is contained within the panel, while values when using
y_projection_method="y"
might overflow at the borders (i.e., panel B in
Fig.
˜
8
).
We do not recommend drawing conclusions from
LStein
exclusively, but rather combine it with other visualization techniques.
5
Extension to other fields
We designed
LStein
to be general enough for a variety of applications.
In principle,
LStein
can be applied to any 2.5D dataset, no matter the field of research or industry.
This section will provide a non-exhaustive list of contexts where
LStein
might be useful.
5.1
Spectral evolution over time
Another mode of observation in astronomy is spectroscopy, where one splits the incoming light into its independent wavelength components (essentially an infinite amount of passbands).
Spectroscopy usually has a very high spectral (wavelength) resolution, but is sparse in time.
The evolution of a spectrum over time does, however, encode important information about astrophysical transients such as
supernovae
(i.e., Filippenko,
1997
)
.
One could use
LStein
to plot the spectral evolution over time by using the following mapping:
λ
↦
x
LS
f
↦
y
LS
t
↦
θ
LS
,
\displaystyle\begin{split}\lambda&\mapsto x^{\mathrm{LS}}\\
f&\mapsto y^{\mathrm{LS}}\\
t&\mapsto\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}\\
\end{split},
(15)
where
λ
\lambda
denotes wavelength,
f
f
is the recorded flux, and
t
t
is time.
We show an example in
Fig.
˜
12
, where it is visible which measurements have been taken closer together or further apart.
Figure 12:
Example application showing temporal evolution of spectra from a
supernova
explosion.
The displayed object is SN2023ixf.
Displayed spectra are from the
Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument
(
DESI
Levi et al.,
2019
)
.
Note, that in order to reduce distorting projection effects, we rescaled the wavelength to the range
[
0
,
10
]
[0,10]
(similar range to flux values) reapplied the physical tick-labels afterward.
The alternative would be to use
y_projection_method="y"
.
5.2
Radio Astronomy
Pulsar timing research, a field in radio-astronomy, is concerned with the dispersion of a pulse over different frequencies.
Traditionally, this analysis is done by plotting a heatmap of intensity
I
I
in dependence of pulsar-phase
ϕ
\phi
and frequency band
f
f
.
Heatmaps make it challenging to discern small-scale variations by eye because they are based on color-variation
(i.e., Moreland,
2009
,
2015
)
.
This makes identification of radio-glitches (inconsistencies in the data that can influence interpretation) difficult, especially since the pulse-intensity dominates the color-scale.
Additionally, radio-astronomy is highly influenced by modern society due to the extensive use of radio-frequencies for communications, which contaminate specific frequency bands to the point where they might become unusable.
With
LStein
, one could map as follows:
ϕ
↦
x
LS
I
↦
y
LS
f
↦
θ
LS
.
\displaystyle\begin{split}\phi&\mapsto x^{\mathrm{LS}}\\
I&\mapsto y^{\mathrm{LS}}\\
f&\mapsto\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}\\
\end{split}.
(16)
This way, contaminated bands can simply be removed, because the position in frequency space is preserved.
Additionally, showing the actual vertical values simplifies identification of radio-glitches and small-scale features.
To ease the glitch-discovery even further, one can exploit the projection towards the edges of the
LSteinCanvas
and amplify regions of interest.
We show an example for an application to a pulsar observed with
MeerKAT
(Booth et al.,
2009
; Johnston et al.,
2020
; Bailes et al.,
2020
)
in
Fig.
˜
13
.
The data was obtained from the Pulsar Portal
5
5
5
Homepage:
https://pulsars.org.au/
(Bailes et al., in prep).
One can see the pulse profile, and location of missing, as well as highly contaminated radio frequency bands.
This particular example did not show features that migrate across the phase-dimension but in other examples we explored also these were identifiable.
Figure 13:
Example application to pulsar timing research.
The displayed pulsar is J2145-0750 with observations from 2023-03-07-09:08:21.
We simulate randomly missing frequency bands in the data.
Because the dataset is very dense in
θ
\theta
the panels do overlap.
To preserve readability we only indicate a single panel to give the reader an idea of panel sizes.
Note that we used
y_projection_method="y"
for this example because only one series was plotted per panel and large values lead to strong projection effects when applying
y_projection_method="theta"
.
Flux is provided in arbitrary units.
5.3
Learning curves
In
machine learning (ML)
, learning-curves are commonly used to quantify a model’s performance over time.
A straightforward way of using
LStein
in this context would be to map as follows:
epoch
↦
x
LS
ℒ
↦
y
LS
ℋ
↦
θ
LS
,
\displaystyle\begin{split}\text{epoch}&\mapsto x^{\mathrm{LS}}\\
\mathcal{L}&\mapsto y^{\mathrm{LS}}\\
\mathcal{H}&\mapsto\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}\\
\end{split},
(17)
where
ℋ
\mathcal{H}
is representative for any hyperparameter (i.e., number of layers in a neural network, regularization parameter, number of neurons).
The model’s performance (loss) is denoted as
ℒ
\mathcal{L}
.
An example of
ML
learning curves can be found in
Fig.
˜
14
.
The curves in
Fig.
˜
14
are from training an
Autoencoder
(Kramer,
1991
)
to encode
modified National Institute of Standards and Technology database (MNIST)
handwritten digits
(Deng,
2012
)
6
6
6
See
https://github.com/TheRedElement/LStein/blob/paper/data/auto_encoder_hypsearch.ipynb
for the training script.
.
Figure 14:
Example applying
LStein
to visualize a hyperparameter search.
Solid lines denote training loss, dashed lines validation loss.
5.4
Spiking neurons
Spiking Neural Networks
(
SNNs
, Maass,
1997
)
are biologically inspired neural networks that use discrete spikes to propagate information.
These networks are extensively studied in computational neuroscience and are especially interesting because they resemble the biological inner workings of a brain much closer than the
artificial neural networks (ANNs)
used in
deep learning (DL)
.
LStein
can facilitate an easy comparison of several neuron-types used in a
Spiking Neural Network (SNN)
with different (constant) input current
I
ext
I_{\mathrm{ext}}
.
To do so one would map like so:
t
↦
x
LS
u
membrane
↦
y
LS
I
ext
↦
θ
LS
,
\displaystyle\begin{split}t&\mapsto x^{\mathrm{LS}}\\
u_{\mathrm{membrane}}&\mapsto y^{\mathrm{LS}}\\
I_{\mathrm{ext}}&\mapsto\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}\\
\end{split},
(18)
with
u
membrane
u_{\mathrm{membrane}}
being the neurons membrane potential.
In this setting it would be easy to plot several different neuron-types in each panel (see
Fig.
˜
15
).
One can take advantage of the fact that color is not used in the encoding process to plot lines of the same neuron type in the same color.
This way, it is easy to spot the same neuron type and compare across panels.
Other quantities that might be interesting when displayed as
θ
\theta
are: the number of pre-synaptic neurons, or concentrations of chemical tracers.
Figure 15:
Example applying
LStein
to
SNNs
.
Different colors denote different neuron models (Leaky Integrate and Fire – LIF; Exponential Integrate and Fire – EIF; Quadratic Integrate and Fire – QIF).
Simulations have been done with
Brian 2
(Stimberg et al.,
2019
)
.
6
Known issues and workarounds
6.1
Error bars
In the current implementation of
LStein
, we do not support the plotting of error bars.
The reason is, that these are affected by the projection, which makes it nontrivial to plot them in a consistent manner.
An easy workaround is to plot error-regions in the form of two additional lines
y
±
|
Δ
​
y
|
y\,\pm\,|\Delta y|
(see
Fig.
˜
16
).
The uncertainty in
y
y
is hereby denoted as
Δ
​
y
\Delta y
.
Note, that the projection effects have to be taken into account here as well, which means that one has to allocate additional buffer in the y-limits to make sure error-regions are not cropped at the edge of the
LSteinPanel
.
Figure 16:
Workaround for showing errorbars.
The scatter are the actual measurements, dashed lines denote error-regions.
6.2
Series types
For similar reasons to
Sec.
˜
6.1
we only support scatter- (
seriestype="scatter"
) and line-plots (
seriestype="line"
) at the moment.
There is no clean workaround as of now, but we encourage users to open a pull-request on
GitHub
7
7
7
https://github.com/TheRedElement/LStein/pulls
, in case they implement other series types.
It has yet to be explored, if there are other series types besides scatter- and line-plots where
LStein
could be a useful alternative for visualisation.
6.3
Inverting
thetaticks
When passing a reverse sorted (descending order) list as
thetaticks
to
LSteinCanvas
,
LStein
will not adjust the displayed tick labels correctly.
Instead, it will pair the passed argument (sorted in descending order as tick labels) with a rescaled version (sorted in ascending order) used for the tick-positions.
This can be fixed by passing explicit tick labels to
LSteinCanvas
:
(thetaticks_descending,thetaticks_ascending)
.
The reverse sorted list is
thetaticks_descending
, the labels to be used are
thetaticks_ascending
.
6.4
Log scale
There is no dedicated implementation of a
log
\log
-scale because this can internally lead to unpredictable projection effects.
However, one can easily achieve the same effect by manually scaling the data and exploiting the customization options.
Specifically, one can set custom ticks by means of the
xticks
keyword argument (equivalently for
θ
LS
\theta^{\mathrm{LS}}
and
y
LS
y^{\mathrm{LS}}
).
We provide an example in
LABEL:lst-logscale
.
Listing 3:
Example skeleton for applying a
log
\log
-scale.
⬇
1
x
=
…
2
y
=
…
3
theta
=
…
4
5
x
=
[
np
.
log10
(
xi
)
for
xi
in
x
]
6
y
=
[
np
.
log10
(
yi
)
for
yi
in
y
]
7
theta
=
[
np
.
log10
(
thi
)
for
thi
in
theta
]
8
xticks
=
np
.
logspace
(0,5,6)
9
yticks
=
np
.
logspace
(0,5,6)
10
thetaticks
=
np
.
logspace
(0,5,6)
11
LSC
=
LSteinCanvas
(
12
thetaticks
,
xticks
=
xticks
,
13
yticks
=
yticks
,
…
14
)
6.5
Backend subtleties
LStein
was mainly implemented for
matplotlib
.
Therefore, all the internal customization arguments follow the
matplotlib
names.
For the
Plotly
backend, we wrote a translator that translates some of the arguments to the native names.
However, as translation is not trivial, we do not guarantee that all arguments have a valid counterpart in
Plotly
.
Especially for annotations (axis-labels, tick-labels, etc.), this can lead to issues.
The two workarounds are as follows:
(a)
Remove the parameters and add custom annotations instead;
(b)
Use the default parameters for these elements.
7
Further development
The modular nature of
LStein
enables building extensions to the existing package with relative ease.
Future work will aim to include errorbars and a panel-span encoding into
LStein
.
Applications where encoding information into the panel-span could be useful, include the following:
•
Requirement of the knowledge of the passband width in addition to its central wavelength.
•
Encoding of integration time when taking a specific spectrum (
Sec.
˜
5.1
).
•
Semi-random input current with some characteristic width around an average value (
Sec.
˜
5.4
).
We decided against the implementation of such a feature in our first version of
LStein
, because it would interfere with the comparability of the
y
y
-ranges across
LSteinPanel
s.
Furthermore, panels are at higher risk to overlap and the plot could contain too much information for the viewer to process simultaneously.
8
Summary
We presented
LStein
a new plotting framework to visualize 2.5-dimensional (3D where one dimension is sparse) data in 2 dimensions.
The projection is achieved by executing scaling operations in Cartesian and polar coordinates in different steps to ensure preservation of qualitative data-series attributes (
Sec.
˜
4.1
).
Our approach is a first instance to tackle the reduction of wavelength information when plotting
lightcurves
in multiple passbands.
Especially observations in similar passbands can benefit from a visualisation in the
LStein
framework because the passband closeness encoding allows the user to draw sensible conclusions about the
LC
at wavelengths that have not been observed.
Comparing our method to traditional approaches shows advantages of using this alternative way of inspecting the data.
Most information can, of course, be extracted from data by looking at it from different angles i.e., combining traditional methods with
LStein
.
We outlined our design principles which include ease of use, intuitiveness, and customizability.
We follow the application flows of widely used visualisation libraries to ensure a shallow learning curve and provide implementations for two popular plotting libraries (
matplotlib
and
Plotly
).
To make
LStein
even more accessible, we plan to include it on the
Fink
broker portal.
To demonstrate that our approach is not limited to astronomy, we provided a non-exhaustive list of examples in which it could also be useful.
Users are encouraged to come up with more creative ways of using
LStein
.
The code is open source and publicly available on
GitHub
8
8
8
GitHub
:
https://github.com/TheRedElement/LStein
.
The
documentation
can be accessed through
Read the Docs
9
9
9
Documentation:
https://lstein.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
.
Finally, we provide a set of known issues and current workarounds.
We plan to mitigate some of those issues in the near future.
We expect that
LStein
will be a useful tool to visualize data from modern astrophysical surveys and hope that also other fields will find value in this approach.
Acknowledgments
This work was developed within the
Fink
community and made use of the
Fink
community broker resources.
Fink
is supported by LSST-France and CNRS/IN2P3.
This research was supported by grants from the Australian Research Council.
AM is supported by the ARC Discovery Early Research Award (DE230100055).
Parts of this research were conducted by the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Gravitational Wave Discovery (OzGrav), through project CE230100016.
Data availability statement
All data used in this research is publicly available and referenced accordingly in the manuscript.
Author contribution
LS:
Conceptualization,
Formal analysis,
Methodology,
Software,
Visualization,
Writing – review and editing,
Writing – original draft.
AM:
Methodology,
Supervision,
Writing – review and editing.
CJF:
Methodology,
Supervision,
Writing – review and editing.
Glossary
ANN
Neural Network.
Deep AI model inspired by the human brain.
Consists of nodes interconnected with weights that get adjusted during training to learn a mean best model for the data at hand
AE
Autoencoder.
Neural network to learn efficient encodings of datasets.
Learns by mapping a series onto itself after passing it through a low-dimensional bottleneck layer
Brian 2
Neural Network.
Homepage:
https://brian2.readthedocs.io
.
Simulation framework for spiking neural networks.
Details in
Stimberg et al. (
2019
)
.
DESI
Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument.
Homepage:
https://www.desi.lbl.gov//
.
Instrument to measure the effect of dark energy on the expansion of the universe.
Goal: obtain optical spectra for constructing a 3D map of the nearby universe.
Details in
Levi et al. (
2019
)
and references therein
DL
Deep Learning.
Artificial intelligence facilitated by deep neural networks (neural networks with 2 or more hidden layers).
ELAsTiCC
Extended LSST Astronomical Time-series Classification Challenge.
Dataset for a community challenge to test brokers for LSST suitability
Fink
Fink
.
Homepage:
https://fink-broker.org
Community broker to process full stream of transient alerts from LSST
GitHub
GitHub.
Homepage:
https://github.com/
.
JavaScript
JavaScript.
Programming language widely used in web development.
JSON
JavaScript Object Notation.
File format based on java script syntax.
Machine- as well as human-readable
LC
Lightcurve.
Brightness recordings of some astronomical object over time
Rubin LSST
Rubin Legacy Survey of Space and Time.
Homepage:
https://www.lsst.org/
.
Modern astronomical survey monitoring the southern night-sky.
Details in
Ivezić et al. (
2019
)
LStein
Rubin Legacy Survey of Space and Time.
Homepage:
https://github.com/TheRedElement/LStein
MeerKAT
MeerKAT.
Radio telescope located in Meerkat National Park in South Africa.
Formerly Karoo Array Telescope.
Homepage:
https://www.sarao.ac.za/science/meerkat/about-meerkat/
.
Details in
Johnston et al. (
2020
)
ML
Machine Learning.
A sub-field of AI focussed on algorithms and systems that adapt and learn based on data and patterns contained within
MNIST
Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology database.
Database of handwritten digits.
PDF
Portable Document Format.
Plotly
plotly
.
Homepage:
https://plotly.com/
,
https://plotly.com/python/
.
References:
Plotly2015_Plotly
.
matplotlib
matplotlib
.
Homepage:
https://matplotlib.org/
.
References:
Hunter (
2007
)
.
sncosmo
sncosmo
.
Homepage:
https://sncosmo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
.
References:
Barbary et al. (
2025
)
.
Python
Python.
Homepage:
https://www.python.org/
.
References:
Van Rossum and Drake (
2009
)
.
Read the Docs
Read the Docs.
Homepage:
https://about.readthedocs.com/
.
Rubin
Rubin Observatory.
Homepage:
https://rubinobservatory.org/
.
Telescope completing the LSST.
SN
Supernova.
Explosive end of a stars life.
The specific type depends on the evolutionary history and a stars core mass
SNN
Spiking Neural Network.
Biology inspired neural network extensively studie in computational neuroscience.
Based on information relay via spike emission of neurons.
TDE
Tidal Disruption Event.
Transient event in which tidal forces of some astronomical object rip apart an orbiting object.
References
Bailes et al. (2020)
Bailes, M., Jameson, A.,
Abbate, F., Barr, E.D.,
Bhat, N.D.R., Bondonneau, L.,
Burgay, M., Buchner, S.J.,
Camilo, F., Champion, D.J.,
et al., 2020.
The MeerKAT telescope as a pulsar facility: System
verification and early science results from MeerTime.
Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 37, e028.
doi:
10.1017/pasa.2020.19
,
arXiv:2005.14366
.
Balona and
Evers (1999)
Balona, L.A., Evers, E.A.,
1999.
Mode identification and asteroseismology of delta
Scuti stars.
Monthly Notices of the RAS 302,
349–361.
doi:
10.1046/j.1365-8711.1999.02125.x
.
Barbary et al. (2025)
Barbary, K., Bailey, S.,
Barentsen, G., Barclay, T.,
Biswas, R., Boone, K.,
Craig, M., Feindt, U.,
Friesen, B., Goldstein, D.,
Jha, S.W., Jones, D.O.,
Mondon, F., Papadogiannakis, S.,
Perrefort, D., Pierel, J.,
Rodney, S., Rose, B.,
Saunders, C., Sipőcz, B.,
Sofiatti, C., Thomas, R.C.,
van Santen, J., Vincenzi, M.,
Wang, D., Wood-Vasey, M.,
2025.
Sncosmo.
URL:
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15019859
,
doi:
10.5281/zenodo.15019859
.
Bellinger et al. (2024)
Bellinger, E.P., de Mink, S.E.,
van Rossem, W.E., Justham, S.,
2024.
The Potential of Asteroseismology to Resolve the
Blue Supergiant Problem.
The Astrophysical Journal 967, L39.
doi:
10.3847/2041-8213/ad4990
,
arXiv:2311.00038
.
Booth et al. (2009)
Booth, R.S., de Blok, W.J.G.,
Jonas, J.L., Fanaroff, B.,
2009.
MeerKAT Key Project Science, Specifications, and
Proposals.
arXiv e-prints ,
arXiv:0910.2935doi:
10.48550/arXiv.0910.2935
,
arXiv:0910.2935
.
Deng (2012)
Deng, L., 2012.
The mnist database of handwritten digit images for
machine learning research [best of the web].
IEEE signal processing magazine
29, 141–142.
Filippenko (1997)
Filippenko, A.V., 1997.
Optical Spectra of Supernovae.
Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 35,
309–355.
doi:
10.1146/annurev.astro.35.1.309
.
Fluke et al. (2009)
Fluke, C.J., Barnes, D.G.,
Jones, N.T., 2009.
Interchanging interactive 3d graphics for astronomy.
Publications of the Astronomical Society of
Australia 26, 64–74.
doi:
10.1071/AS08025
.
Fraga et al. (2024)
Fraga, B.M.O., Bom, C.R.,
Santos, A., Russeil, E.,
Leoni, M., Peloton, J.,
Ishida, E.E.O., Möller, A.,
Blondin, S., 2024.
Transient classifiers for Fink: Benchmarks for
LSST.
Astronomy and Astrophysics 692, A208.
doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202450370
,
arXiv:2404.08798
.
Fritzewski et al. (2025)
Fritzewski, D.J., Vanrespaille, M.,
Aerts, C., Guo, Z.,
Hey, D., De Ridder, J.,
2025.
Mode identification and ensemble asteroseismology of
119
β
\beta
Cep stars detected by Gaia light curves and
monitored by TESS.
Astronomy and Astrophysics 698, A253.
doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202451721
,
arXiv:2408.06097
.
Hambleton et al. (2023)
Hambleton, K.M., Bianco, F.B.,
Street, R., Bell, K.,
Buckley, D., Graham, M.,
Hernitschek, N., Lund, M.B.,
Mason, E., Pepper, J.,
Prša, A., Rabus, M.,
Raiteri, C.M., Szabó, R.,
Szkody, P., Andreoni, I.,
Antoniucci, S., Balmaverde, B.,
Bellm, E., Bonito, R.,
Bono, G., Botticella, M.T.,
Brocato, E., Bučar Bricman, K.,
Cappellaro, E., Carnerero, M.I.,
Chornock, R., Clarke, R.,
Cowperthwaite, P., Cucchiara, A.,
D’Ammando, F., Dage, K.C.,
Dall’Ora, M., Davenport, J.R.A.,
de Martino, D., de Somma, G.,
Di Criscienzo, M., Di Stefano, R.,
Drout, M., Fabrizio, M.,
Fiorentino, G., Gandhi, P.,
Garofalo, A., Giannini, T.,
Gomboc, A., Greggio, L.,
Hartigan, P., Hundertmark, M.,
Johnson, E., Johnson, M.,
Jurkic, T., Khakpash, S.,
Leccia, S., Li, X.,
Magurno, D., Malanchev, K.,
Marconi, M., Margutti, R.,
Marinoni, S., Mauron, N.,
Molinaro, R., Möller, A.,
Moniez, M., Muraveva, T.,
Musella, I., Ngeow, C.C.,
Pastorello, A., Petrecca, V.,
Piranomonte, S., Ragosta, F.,
Reguitti, A., Righi, C.,
Ripepi, V., Rivera Sandoval, L.,
Stassun, K.G., Stroh, M.,
Terreran, G., Trimble, V.,
Tsapras, Y., van Velzen, S.,
Venuti, L., Vink, J.S.,
2023.
Rubin Observatory LSST Transients and Variable Stars
Roadmap.
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific 135,
105002.
doi:
10.1088/1538-3873/acdb9a
,
arXiv:2208.04499
.
Hunter (2007)
Hunter, J.D., 2007.
Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment.
Computing in Science & Engineering
9, 90–95.
doi:
10.1109/MCSE.2007.55
.
Ivezić et al. (2019)
Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S.M.,
Tyson, J.A., Abel, B.,
Acosta, E., Allsman, R.,
Alonso, D., AlSayyad, Y.,
Anderson, S.F., Andrew, J.,
Angel, J.R.P., Angeli, G.Z.,
Ansari, R., Antilogus, P.,
Araujo, C., Armstrong, R.,
Arndt, K.T., Astier, P.,
Aubourg, É., Auza, N.,
Axelrod, T.S., Bard, D.J.,
Barr, J.D., Barrau, A.,
Bartlett, J.G., Bauer, A.E.,
Bauman, B.J., Baumont, S.,
Bechtol, E., Bechtol, K.,
Becker, A.C., Becla, J.,
Beldica, C., Bellavia, S.,
Bianco, F.B., Biswas, R.,
Blanc, G., Blazek, J.,
Blandford, R.D., Bloom, J.S.,
Bogart, J., Bond, T.W.,
Booth, M.T., Borgland, A.W.,
Borne, K., Bosch, J.F.,
Boutigny, D., Brackett, C.A.,
Bradshaw, A., Brandt, W.N.,
Brown, M.E., Bullock, J.S.,
Burchat, P., Burke, D.L.,
Cagnoli, G., Calabrese, D.,
Callahan, S., Callen, A.L.,
Carlin, J.L., Carlson, E.L.,
Chandrasekharan, S., Charles-Emerson,
G., Chesley, S., Cheu, E.C.,
Chiang, H.F., Chiang, J.,
Chirino, C., Chow, D.,
Ciardi, D.R., Claver, C.F.,
Cohen-Tanugi, J., Cockrum, J.J.,
Coles, R., Connolly, A.J.,
Cook, K.H., Cooray, A.,
Covey, K.R., Cribbs, C.,
Cui, W., Cutri, R.,
Daly, P.N., Daniel, S.F.,
Daruich, F., Daubard, G.,
Daues, G., Dawson, W.,
Delgado, F., Dellapenna, A.,
de Peyster, R., de Val-Borro, M.,
Digel, S.W., Doherty, P.,
Dubois, R., Dubois-Felsmann, G.P.,
Durech, J., Economou, F.,
Eifler, T., Eracleous, M.,
Emmons, B.L., Fausti Neto, A.,
Ferguson, H., Figueroa, E.,
Fisher-Levine, M., Focke, W.,
Foss, M.D., Frank, J.,
Freemon, M.D., Gangler, E.,
Gawiser, E., Geary, J.C.,
Gee, P., Geha, M.,
Gessner, C.J.B., Gibson, R.R.,
Gilmore, D.K., Glanzman, T.,
Glick, W., Goldina, T.,
Goldstein, D.A., Goodenow, I.,
Graham, M.L., Gressler, W.J.,
Gris, P., Guy, L.P.,
Guyonnet, A., Haller, G.,
Harris, R., Hascall, P.A.,
Haupt, J., Hernandez, F.,
Herrmann, S., Hileman, E.,
Hoblitt, J., Hodgson, J.A.,
Hogan, C., Howard, J.D.,
Huang, D., Huffer, M.E.,
Ingraham, P., Innes, W.R.,
Jacoby, S.H., Jain, B.,
Jammes, F., Jee, M.J.,
Jenness, T., Jernigan, G.,
Jevremović, D., Johns, K.,
Johnson, A.S., Johnson, M.W.G.,
Jones, R.L., Juramy-Gilles, C.,
Jurić, M., Kalirai, J.S.,
Kallivayalil, N.J., Kalmbach, B.,
Kantor, J.P., Karst, P.,
Kasliwal, M.M., Kelly, H.,
Kessler, R., Kinnison, V.,
Kirkby, D., Knox, L.,
Kotov, I.V., Krabbendam, V.L.,
Krughoff, K.S., Kubánek, P.,
Kuczewski, J., Kulkarni, S.,
Ku, J., Kurita, N.R.,
Lage, C.S., Lambert, R.,
Lange, T., Langton, J.B.,
Le Guillou, L., Levine, D.,
Liang, M., Lim, K.T.,
Lintott, C.J., Long, K.E.,
Lopez, M., Lotz, P.J.,
Lupton, R.H., Lust, N.B.,
MacArthur, L.A., Mahabal, A.,
Mandelbaum, R., Markiewicz, T.W.,
Marsh, D.S., Marshall, P.J.,
Marshall, S., May, M.,
McKercher, R., McQueen, M.,
Meyers, J., Migliore, M.,
Miller, M., Mills, D.J.,
Miraval, C., Moeyens, J.,
Moolekamp, F.E., Monet, D.G.,
Moniez, M., Monkewitz, S.,
Montgomery, C., Morrison, C.B.,
Mueller, F., Muller, G.P.,
Muñoz Arancibia, F., Neill, D.R.,
Newbry, S.P., Nief, J.Y.,
Nomerotski, A., Nordby, M.,
O’Connor, P., Oliver, J.,
Olivier, S.S., Olsen, K.,
O’Mullane, W., Ortiz, S.,
Osier, S., Owen, R.E.,
Pain, R., Palecek, P.E.,
Parejko, J.K., Parsons, J.B.,
Pease, N.M., Peterson, J.M.,
Peterson, J.R., Petravick, D.L.,
Libby Petrick, M.E., Petry, C.E.,
Pierfederici, F., Pietrowicz, S.,
Pike, R., Pinto, P.A.,
Plante, R., Plate, S.,
Plutchak, J.P., Price, P.A.,
Prouza, M., Radeka, V.,
Rajagopal, J., Rasmussen, A.P.,
Regnault, N., Reil, K.A.,
Reiss, D.J., Reuter, M.A.,
Ridgway, S.T., Riot, V.J.,
Ritz, S., Robinson, S.,
Roby, W., Roodman, A.,
Rosing, W., Roucelle, C.,
Rumore, M.R., Russo, S.,
Saha, A., Sassolas, B.,
Schalk, T.L., Schellart, P.,
Schindler, R.H., Schmidt, S.,
Schneider, D.P., Schneider, M.D.,
Schoening, W., Schumacher, G.,
Schwamb, M.E., Sebag, J.,
Selvy, B., Sembroski, G.H.,
Seppala, L.G., Serio, A.,
Serrano, E., Shaw, R.A.,
Shipsey, I., Sick, J.,
Silvestri, N., Slater, C.T.,
Smith, J.A., Smith, R.C.,
Sobhani, S., Soldahl, C.,
Storrie-Lombardi, L., Stover, E.,
Strauss, M.A., Street, R.A.,
Stubbs, C.W., Sullivan, I.S.,
Sweeney, D., Swinbank, J.D.,
Szalay, A., Takacs, P.,
Tether, S.A., Thaler, J.J.,
Thayer, J.G., Thomas, S.,
Thornton, A.J., Thukral, V.,
Tice, J., Trilling, D.E.,
Turri, M., Van Berg, R.,
Vanden Berk, D., Vetter, K.,
Virieux, F., Vucina, T.,
Wahl, W., Walkowicz, L.,
Walsh, B., Walter, C.W.,
Wang, D.L., Wang, S.Y.,
Warner, M., Wiecha, O.,
Willman, B., Winters, S.E.,
Wittman, D., Wolff, S.C.,
Wood-Vasey, W.M., Wu, X.,
Xin, B., Yoachim, P.,
Zhan, H., 2019.
LSST: From Science Drivers to Reference Design and
Anticipated Data Products.
The Astrophysical Journal 873, 111.
doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ab042c
,
arXiv:0805.2366
.
Johnston et al. (2020)
Johnston, S., Karastergiou, A.,
Keith, M.J., Song, X.,
Weltevrede, P., Abbate, F.,
Bailes, M., Buchner, S.,
Camilo, F., Geyer, M.,
Hugo, B., Jameson, A.,
Kramer, M., Parthasarathy, A.,
Reardon, D.J., Ridolfi, A.,
Serylak, M., Shannon, R.M.,
Spiewak, R., van Straten, W.,
Venkatraman Krishnan, V., Jankowski,
F., Meyers, B.W., Oswald, L.,
Posselt, B., Sobey, C.,
Szary, A., van Leeuwen, J.,
2020.
The Thousand-Pulsar-Array programme on MeerKAT –
I. Science objectives and first results.
Monthly Notices of the RAS 493,
3608–3615.
doi:
10.1093/mnras/staa516
,
arXiv:2002.10250
.
Knop and ELAsTiCC Team (2023)
Knop, R., ELAsTiCC Team,
2023.
Simulated Transient Alerts and Broker
Classifications for ELAsTiCC, in: American Astronomical
Society Meeting Abstracts #241, p. 117.02.
Koornneef et al. (1986)
Koornneef, J., Bohlin, R.,
Buser, R., Horne, K.,
Turnshek, D., 1986.
Synthetic photometry and the calibration of the
Hubble Space Telescope.
Highlights of Astronomy 7,
833–843.
Kramer (1991)
Kramer, M.A., 1991.
Nonlinear principal component analysis using
autoassociative neural networks.
AIChE Journal 37,
233–243.
doi:
10.1002/aic.690370209
.
Levi et al. (2019)
Levi, M., Allen, L.E.,
Raichoor, A., Baltay, C.,
BenZvi, S., Beutler, F.,
Bolton, A., Castander, F.J.,
Chuang, C.H., Cooper, A.,
Cuby, J.G., Dey, A.,
Eisenstein, D., Fan, X.,
Flaugher, B., Frenk, C.,
Gonzalez-Morales, A.X., Graur, O.,
Guy, J., Habib, S.,
Honscheid, K., Juneau, S.,
Kneib, J.P., Lahav, O.,
Lang, D., Leauthaud, A.,
Lusso, B., de la Macorra, A.,
Manera, M., Martini, P.,
Mao, S., Newman, J.A.,
Palanque-Delabrouille, N., Percival,
W.J., Allende Prieto, C., Rockosi,
C.M., Ruhlmann-Kleider, V., Schlegel,
D., Seo, H.J., Song, Y.S.,
Tarle, G., Wechsler, R.,
Weinberg, D., Yeche, C.,
Zu, Y., 2019.
The Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI),
in: Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society,
p. 57.
doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1907.10688
,
arXiv:1907.10688
.
Llamas Lanza et al. (2026)
Llamas Lanza, M., Karpov, S.,
Russeil, E., Quintin, E.,
Ishida, E.E.O., Peloton, J.,
Pruzhinskaya, M.V., Möller, A.,
2026.
Early identification of optical tidal disruption
events: A science module for the Fink broker.
Astronomy and Astrophysics 705, A144.
doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202556558
,
arXiv:2507.17499
.
Maass (1997)
Maass, W., 1997.
Networks of spiking neurons: the third generation of
neural network models.
Neural networks 10,
1659–1671.
Mandelbrot (1967)
Mandelbrot, B., 1967.
How long is the coast of britain? statistical
self-similarity and fractional dimension.
science 156,
636–638.
Möller and de Boissière (2020)
Möller, A., de Boissière, T.,
2020.
SuperNNova: an open-source framework for Bayesian,
neural network-based supernova classification.
Monthly Notices of the RAS 491,
4277–4293.
doi:
10.1093/mnras/stz3312
,
arXiv:1901.06384
.
Möller et al. (2025)
Möller, A., Ishida, E.,
Peloton, J., Vidal Velázquez, O.,
Soon, J., Martin, B.,
Cluver, M., Leoni, M.,
Taylor, E.N., 2025.
Real-time active learning for optimised
spectroscopic follow-up: Enhancing early SN Ia classification with the Fink
broker.
Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 42, e057.
doi:
10.1017/pasa.2025.20
,
arXiv:2502.19555
.
Möller et al. (2021)
Möller, A., Peloton, J.,
Ishida, E.E.O., Arnault, C.,
Bachelet, E., Blaineau, T.,
Boutigny, D., Chauhan, A.,
Gangler, E., Hernandez, F.,
et al., 2021.
FINK, a new generation of broker for the LSST
community.
Monthly Notices of the RAS 501,
3272–3288.
doi:
10.1093/mnras/staa3602
,
arXiv:2009.10185
.
Moreland (2009)
Moreland, K., 2009.
Diverging color maps for scientific visualization,
in: International symposium on visual computing,
Springer. pp. 92–103.
Moreland (2015)
Moreland, K.D., 2015.
Why We Use Bad Color Maps and What You Can Do About
It.
Technical Report. Sandia National Laboratories
(SNL-NM), Albuquerque, NM (United States).
Peláez-Torres et al. (2024)
Peláez-Torres, A., Esparza-Borges,
E., Pallé, E., Parviainen, H.,
Murgas, F., Morello, G.,
Zapatero-Osorio, M.R., Korth, J.,
Narita, N., Fukui, A.,
Carleo, I., Luque, R.,
García, N.A., Barkaoui, K.,
Boyle, A., Béjar, V.J.S.,
Calatayud-Borras, Y., Cheryasov,
D.V., Christiansen, J.L., Ciardi,
D.R., Enoc, G., Essack, Z.,
Fukuda, I., Furesz, G.,
Galán, D.,
Geraldía-González, S.,
Giacalone, S., Gill, H.,
Gonzales, E.J., Hayashi, Y.,
Ikuta, K., Isogai, K.,
Kagetani, T., Kawai, Y.,
Kawauchi, K., Klagyvik, P.,
Kodama, T., Kusakabe, N.,
Laza-Ramos, A., de Leon, J.P.,
Livingston, J.H., Lund, M.B.,
Madrigal-Aguado, A., Meni, P.,
Mori, M., Torres, S.M.,
Orell-Miquel, J., Puig, M.,
Ricker, G., Sánchez-Benavente,
M., Savel, A.B., Schlieder, J.E.,
Schwarz, R.P., Sefako, R.,
Sosa-Guillén, P., Stangret, M.,
Stockdale, C., Tamura, M.,
Terada, Y., Twicken, J.D.,
Watanabe, N., Winn, J.,
Zheltoukhov, S.G., Ziegler, C.,
Zou, Y., 2024.
Validation of up to seven TESS planet candidates
through multi-colour transit photometry using MuSCAT2 data.
Astronomy and Astrophysics 690, A62.
doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202347251
,
arXiv:2409.07400
.
Plotly Technologies Inc. (2015)
Plotly Technologies Inc., 2015.
Collaborative data science.
URL:
https://plot.ly
.
Russeil et al. (2024)
Russeil, E., Malanchev, K.L.,
Aleo, P.D., Ishida, E.E.O.,
Pruzhinskaya, M.V., Gangler, E.,
Lavrukhina, A.D., Volnova, A.A.,
Voloshina, A., Semenikhin, T.,
et al., 2024.
RAINBOW: A colorful approach to multipassband
light-curve estimation.
Astronomy and Astrophysics 683, A251.
doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202348158
,
arXiv:2310.02916
.
Stimberg et al. (2019)
Stimberg, M., Brette, R.,
Goodman, D.F., 2019.
Brian 2, an intuitive and efficient neural
simulator.
elife 8,
e47314.
Van Rossum and Drake (2009)
Van Rossum, G., Drake, F.L.,
2009.
Python 3 Reference Manual.
CreateSpace, Scotts Valley,
CA.
Appendix A
Arbitrary backends
We show the most basic recipe to use
LStein
for production of graphical output in your favorite backend in
LABEL:lst-lsteinrecipe
.
Note that you might have to make minor modifications for some plotting frameworks.
Listing 4:
Recipe to show
LStein
as a figure in an arbitrary backend.
⬇
1
#import
package
2
from
lstein
import
lstein
3
from
lstein
.
utils
import
polar2carth
4
5
#setup
a
new
canvas
6
LSC
=
lstein
.
LSteinCanvas
(…)
7
#add
artists
(will
also
generate
panels)
8
LSC
.
plot
(
thetavals
,
xvals
,
yvals
,
seriestype
=
"scatter"
,
…)
9
LSC
.
plot
(
thetavals
,
xvals
,
yvals
,
seriestype
=
"plot"
,
…)
10
11
ls_xaxis
=
LSC
.
compute_xaxis
()
#get
quantities
defining
the
x-axis
12
ls_thetaaxis
=
LSC
.
compute_thetaaxis
()
#get
quantities
defining
the
theta-axis
13
ls_ylabel
=
LSC
.
compute_ylabel
()
#get
position
of
y-label
14
15
…
#plot
elements
in
your
favourite
backend
16
17
#draw
panels
18
for
LSP
in
LSC
.
Panels
:
19
#get
panel
boundaries
20
theta_offset
,
theta_lb
,
theta_ub
=
LSP
.
get_thetabounds
()
21
r_lb
,
r_ub
=
LSP
.
get_rbounds
()
22
r_bounds
=
np
.
array
([
r_lb
,
r_ub
])
23
24
#get
yticks
25
ytickpos_th
,
yticklabs
=
LSP
.
get_yticks
(
theta_lb
,
theta_ub
)
26
27
#convert
to
cartesian
for
plotting
28
x_lb
,
y_lb
=
polar2carth
(
r_bounds
,
theta_lb
)
29
x_ub
,
y_ub
=
polar2carth
(
r_bounds
,
theta_ub
)
30
x_bounds
=
np
.
array
([
x_lb
,
x_ub
])
31
y_bounds
=
np
.
array
([
y_lb
,
y_ub
])
32
33
pad
=
LSP
.
yticklabelkwargs
[
"pad"
]
#padding
for
yticklabels
34
r_
,
th_
=
np
.
meshgrid
(
r_bounds
,
ytickpos_th
)
35
ytickpos_x
,
ytickpos_y
=
polar2carth
(
r_
,
th_
)
36
yticklabelpos_x
,
yticklabelpos_y
=
polar2carth
((1+
pad
)*
r_ub
,
ytickpos_th
)
37
38
…
#plot
elements
in
your
favourite
backend
39
40
for
ds
in
LSP
.
dateseries
:
41
#plot
series
in
your
favourite
backend
42
if
ds
[
"seriestype"
]
==
"plot"
:
43
plot
(
ds
[
"x"
],
ds
[
"y"
])
44
if
ds
[
"seriestype"
]
==
"scatter"
:
45
scatter
(
ds
[
"x"
],
ds
[
"y"
])
Appendix B
Loading a
JSON
file in
JavaScript
A
JavaScript
function to an
LStein
plot saved as
JSON
file within a website is provided in
LABEL:lst-plotfromjson
.
To include a plot on a website using the function in
LABEL:lst-plotfromjson
, one simply adds an element
<div class="plotly-jsonplot" data-path="path/to/plot.json"></div>
to the website.
Listing 5:
Recipe to show
LStein
as a figure in an arbitrary backend.
⬇
1
async
function
plotFromJson
()
{
2
try
{
3
//get
all
relevant
divs
(divs
to
plot
into)
4
const
plyDivs
=
document
.
getElementsByClassName
(
"plotly-jsonplot"
);
5
6
//deal
with
all
relevant
divs
7
for
(
const
element
of
plyDivs
)
{
8
9
//get
path
to
plotting
data
10
const
dataPath
=
element
.
dataset
.
path
;
11
12
//fetch
json
file
13
const
response
=
await
fetch
(
dataPath
);
14
15
//init
figure
16
const
fig
=
await
response
.
json
();
17
18
//adjust
layout
(no
padding)
19
fig
[
"layout"
][
"margin"
]
=
{};
20
fig
[
"layout"
][
"margin"
][
"t"
]
=
0;
21
fig
[
"layout"
][
"margin"
][
"l"
]
=
0;
22
fig
[
"layout"
][
"margin"
][
"r"
]
=
0;
23
fig
[
"layout"
][
"margin"
][
"b"
]
=
0;
24
25
//show
the
figure
26
Plotly
.
newPlot
(
element
,
fig
.
data
,
fig
.
layout
,
fig
.
config
).
then
(
27
()
=>
{
28
Plotly
.
addFrames
(
element
,
fig
.
frames
);
29
}
30
);
31
}
32
33
}
catch
(
error
)
{
34
console
.
error
(
"Error
␣
fetching
␣
or
␣
plotting
␣
data:"
,
error
);
35
}
36
}
37
plotFromJson
();
38
window
.
addEventListener
(
"resize"
,
function
(
event
)
{
39
plotFromJson
();
40
});
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA