VLTI/PIONIER imaging of post-AGB binaries
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
2
Target systems
3
Data and observations
4
Methodology
4.1
The SPARCO visibility formalism
4.2
Initial SPARCO estimates via geometric modelling
4.3
Image reconstruction workflow
4.3.1
ORGANIC image reconstruction
4.3.2
SPARCO optimisation
4.3.3
Selection of the regularisation weight and pixel scale
4.3.4
Correction of the secondary detection
4.3.5
Uncertainty estimation
4.3.6
Workflow and image feature validation
5
Results
5.1
Rim fitting and brightness profile calculation
5.2
Apparent rim inclinations and the RVb phenomenon
5.3
Detected features
5.3.1
AI Sco
5.3.2
EN TrA
5.3.3
HD 95767
5.3.4
HD 108015
5.3.5
HR 4049
5.3.6
IRAS 15469-53110
5.3.7
IW Car
5.3.8
PS Gem
6
Discussion
6.1
Mechanism behind the inner rim position
6.1.1
Dust sublimation
6.1.2
Dynamical truncation by the binary
6.2
Origins of the detected potential substructures
6.2.1
Thermal response to the primary’s orbit
6.2.2
Dynamical interaction with the binary
6.2.3
Hydrodynamical instability
6.2.4
IW Car: a morphological puzzle
7
Summary and conclusions
Acknowledgements
References
A
Individual target descriptions
A.1
AI Sco
A.2
EN TrA
A.3
HD 95767
A.4
HD 108015
A.5
HR 4049
A.6
IRAS 15469-5311
A.7
IW Car
A.8
PS Gem
B
Geometric model images and synthetic data reconstructions
B.1
Bias assessment through synthetic reconstructions
C
Effect of regularisation weight on ORGANIC reconstructions
D
SQUEEZE reconstructions
E
Selected data
F
Image robustness against
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage artefacts
F.1
Dirty beams
F.2
Identifying potential beam-induced artefacts
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2605.13445v1 [astro-ph.SR] 13 May 2026
1
1
institutetext:
Institute of Astronomy, KU Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200D, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
2
2
institutetext:
School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Macquarie University, Balaclava Road, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia
3
3
institutetext:
Astrophysics and Space Technologies Research Centre, Macquarie University, Balaclava Road, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia
4
4
institutetext:
European Southern Observatory, Alonso de Córdova 3107, Vitacura, Casilla 19001, Santiago, Chile
5
5
institutetext:
Observatorio Astronómico Nacional (OAN-IGN), Alfonso XII 3, 28014 Madrid, Spain
6
6
institutetext:
The CHARA Array of Georgia State University, Mount Wilson Observatory, Mount Wilson, CA 91023, USA
7
7
institutetext:
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, IPAG, F-38000 Grenoble, France
8
8
institutetext:
Observatorio Astronómico Nacional (OAN-IGN), Apartado 112, 28803 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain
9
9
institutetext:
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Stocker Road, Exeter EX4 4QL, UK
10
10
institutetext:
Department of Space, Earth and Environment, Chalmers University of Technology, Onsala Space Observatory, 43992 Onsala, Sweden
VLTI/PIONIER imaging of post-AGB binaries
An INSPIRING hunt for inner rim substructures in circumbinary discs
†
†
thanks:
Based on observations collected at the European Southern Observatory under ESO programme 1103.D-0797.
,
†
†
thanks:
The reconstructed images are available at the CDS
T. De Prins
Corresponding author,
toon.deprins@kuleuven.be
A. Corporaal
J. Kluska
D. Kamath
H. Van Winckel
K. Andrych
J. Alcolea
N. Anugu
J.-P. Berger
V. Bujarrabal
I. Gallardo Cava
S. Kraus
H. Olofsson
(Received 09 December 2025 / Accepted 11 May 2029)
Abstract
Context.
Post-asymptotic giant branch (post-AGB) binaries are surrounded by stable dusty discs. Despite extensive evidence for disc-binary interactions and complex morphologies, systematic studies of the inner disc rim morphology and dynamics are lacking.
Aims.
We image the detailed inner rim morphology for a sample of ’full’ post-AGB circumbinary discs observed using NIR interferometry. At resolutions down to
∼
1
−
2
​
mas
\sim\!1\!-\!2\,\mathrm{mas}
(corresponding to
∼
1
−
10
​
AU
\sim\!1\!-\!10\,\mathrm{AU}
), we aim to reveal potential substructures that may trace perturbations from the binary or embedded substellar companions, or that arise from hydrodynamical instabilities.
Methods.
We developed a systematic image reconstruction workflow using the SPARCO approach together with the ORGANIC reconstruction algorithm. This was applied to VLTI/PIONIER data of eight diverse post-AGB binaries obtained within the INSPIRING ESO large programme, providing high-fidelity images of dust continuum emission at the inner rim. Extensive tests were applied to assess the robustness of the recovered image features.
Results.
The dusty disc rim is well-resolved for all targets. Only one of the images can be fully accounted for by simple radiative transfer effects due to disc inclination, while in several others indications of potential substructures are detected. Strikingly, four exhibit robust azimuthal brightness enhancements at locations not expected from inclination effects alone. These can indicate strong radiative or dynamical responses to the binary, or vortices formed via hydrodynamical instabilities. One target – IW Car – displays an even more puzzling morphology, showing a single large-scale outer flux arc and several small-scale arcs closer to the binary, possibly revealing accretion streams onto the binary, a misaligned innermost disc, or a spiral feature located in the disc or in an outflow.
Conclusions.
This work presents the first homogeneous interferometric imaging survey of the inner regions of post-AGB circumbinary discs, enabling direct comparison of inner rim morphologies across a representative sample. The inner disc regions are highly diverse and dynamic, harbouring a significant amount of substructure candidates. Multi-wavelength and time-series imaging will be essential in constraining the extent, motion and wavelength-dependence of these features, and uncover their physical origins.
Key Words.:
stars: AGB and post-AGB – techniques: high angular resolution –
techniques: interferometric – protoplanetary disks – binaries: general – circumstellar
matter
\nolinenumbers
1
Introduction
Dusty circumstellar discs are observed in systems at various phases of stellar
evolution. One such type of system is the post-asymptotic giant branch (post-AGB)
binary
(for a recent review, see Van Winckel,
2025
, and references therein)
.
The post-AGB phase represents a brief period of contraction after the envelope
of a low-to-intermediate mass star has been stripped on the AGB. The star remains
at a constant luminosity on the order of
∼
10
3
−
10
4
​
L
⊙
\sim\!10^{3}\!-\!10^{4}\,\mathrm{L_{\odot}}
(Van Winckel,
2003
)
, heating up until it reaches the white dwarf phase in
∼
10
4
−
10
5
​
yr
\sim\!10^{4}\!-\!10^{5}\,\mathrm{yr}
(Bertolami,
2016
)
. A large
subset of post-AGB systems – about one third – show spectral energy distributions
(SEDs) with broad infrared (IR) excesses, indicative of stable dusty circumbinary
discs
(e.g. de Ruyter et al.,
2006
; Kamath et al.,
2014
,
2015
; Kluska et al.,
2022
)
. The binarity
of these disc sources has been confirmed through extensive radial velocity (RV)
monitoring, showing that the companions are likely on the main sequence
(Oomen et al.,
2018
)
.
Due to the strong link between IR excess and binarity, it is thought that the disc
is formed from envelope material ejected during a poorly understood phase of binary
interaction on the AGB
(Van Winckel,
2019
)
. Recently,
Kluska et al. (
2022
)
presented an SED catalogue of 85 systems, encompassing all disc-bearing
Galactic post-AGB binaries known up to that date. Based on these SEDs, the
authors showed that the majority of the dust discs can be considered part of the ’full’
disc category, defined as discs with inner rims close to the dust sublimation radius and a corresponding excess starting
in the near-infrared (NIR). In addition, they also identified a sizeable population
of ’transition’ discs, typified by larger inner cavities
(confirmed using
optical interferometry by Corporaal et al.,
2023a
)
and excess starting in the mid-infrared
(MIR).
The stability of post-AGB circumbinary discs is confirmed through the
detection of Keplerian velocity fields in single-dish and interferometric (sub-)
mm
\mathrm{mm}
observations of CO lines
(Bujarrabal et al.,
2013a
,
b
,
2015
,
2017
,
2018
; Gallardo Cava et al.,
2021
)
,
revealing gas discs with outer radii of
∼
100
−
1000
​
AU
\sim\!100-\!1000\,\mathrm{AU}
(angular sizes
≲
1.5
−
2
​
″
\lesssim\!1.5\!-\!2\,\mathrm{\arcsec}
at typical system distances of
≳
1
​
kpc
\gtrsim\!1\,\mathrm{kpc}
).
IR spectroscopy,
mm
\mathrm{mm}
photometry and
mm
\mathrm{mm}
interferometry
reveal significant silicate grain crystallinity and grain growth
(e.g. Gielen et al.,
2008
; Sahai et al.,
2011
; Scicluna et al.,
2020
; Bujarrabal et al.,
2023
)
– in some cases up to at least
mm
\mathrm{mm}
size – showing that dust processing
has proceeded to an advanced stage. The hot inner disc rim, at a typical size of
several
AU
\mathrm{AU}
(
∼
1
−
10
​
mas
\sim\!1\!-\!10\,\mathrm{mas}
), has been resolved in
thermal dust emission using optical interferometry
(e.g. Kluska et al.,
2019
)
.
The outer disc regions are instead resolved in scattered light using single-telescope
adaptive optics imagers
(e.g. Andrych et al.,
2023
,
2025
)
. Together
with extensive radiative transfer (RT) modelling of the inner rim from optical
interferometric data
(Hillen et al.,
2014
,
2015
; Kluska et al.,
2018
; Corporaal et al.,
2023b
)
,
these observations have generally shown that post-AGB circumbinary discs
display high degrees of similarity to passively irradiated protoplanetary
discs (PPDs) around young stellar objects (YSOs).
Post-AGB circumbinary discs are not isolated from the rest of their
system. While the influence of the central binary on the circumbinary disc morphology
remains poorly constrained, there is strong observational evidence that the
disc significantly affects the central binary. First, systematic depletion of
dust-forming elements in the post-AGB primary’s atmosphere, a phenomenon called
’refractory depletion’, can be explained through dust trapping and subsequent
re-accretion of cleaned gas from the circumbinary disc
(e.g. Giridhar et al.,
1998
; Van Winckel,
2003
; Oomen et al.,
2019
; Mohorian et al.,
2024
,
2025
)
.
Second, spectroscopic time-series reveal strong blue-shifted absorption in the
Balmer lines, caused by a magnetically launched jet from a circumcompanion
accretion disc, which is itself likely fed by re-accretion from the larger
circumbinary disc
(e.g. Gorlova et al.,
2012
; Bollen et al.,
2022
; Verhamme et al.,
2024
; De Prins et al.,
2024
)
.
This circumcompanion disc can be detected as a point source in optical
interferometric observations
(Hillen et al.,
2016
; Anugu et al.,
2023
)
. In addition,
Kluska et al. (
2022
)
and
Mohorian et al. (
2025
)
found a correlation between transition discs and refractory
depletion strength, leading the former to suggest that giant planets may be
carving the transition disc cavities – as has been similarly proposed for PPDs
around YSOs
(e.g. Kama et al.,
2015
)
– and raise the possibility of second-generation
planet formation. Together, these findings demonstrate that the inner regions of
post-AGB circumbinary discs must be viewed as highly dynamic environments,
shaped by ongoing interactions.
Given their general similarities, it is natural to compare post-AGB discs with
their younger PPD counterparts. Around PPDs, high-resolution thermal (sub)-
mm
\mathrm{mm}
and optical scattered-light imaging has revealed a wealth of substructures –
spirals, arcs, rings, gaps, shadows, and crescents
(e.g. Andrews et al.,
2018
; Garufi et al.,
2024
)
.
These features have become central to studies of planet formation, as they are
often interpreted as signposts of embedded planets or as outcomes of
instabilities that may themselves promote planet formation
(for a
detailed review, see Bae et al.,
2023
)
. Indeed, previous efforts to resolve the outer
regions of 11 post-AGB circumbinary discs with scattered light imaging
(Ertel et al.,
2019
; Andrych et al.,
2023
,
2024
,
2025
)
have also shown diverse potential substructures, including arc-, spiral- and
ring-like features. Conversely, the detailed morphology and presence of
substructures near the inner post-AGB disc rim, where the effects of the binary
are expected to be strongest, have been investigated to a much lesser extent.
While the inner rim has been resolved for larger samples using optical
interferometry, this was typically through sparse observations suitable only for
limited geometric modelling
(Hillen et al.,
2017
; Kluska et al.,
2019
; Corporaal et al.,
2023a
)
.
Given the expected complexity of the inner disc, information is preferably
extracted using image reconstruction instead. Indeed, non-parametric image
reconstructions have proven to be a powerful tool to reveal unexpected
features in the inner regions of various systems – including PPDs
(e.g. Kluska et al.,
2016
,
2020a
; Ibrahim et al.,
2023
; Setterholm et al.,
2025
)
,
stellar outflows
(e.g. Weigelt et al.,
2016
; Planquart et al.,
2024
)
and stellar
surfaces
(e.g. Drevon et al.,
2024
)
– whose presence would often be hard to
infer using parametrised geometric models. Imaging of post-AGB inner circumbinary
disc rims has nevertheless been limited to only two single-object studies,
targeting IRAS 08544-4431 and HD 101584
(Hillen et al.,
2016
; Kluska et al.,
2020b
)
,
respectively revealing a perturbed azimuthal brightness distribution and a
secondary ring – the latter possibly marking a secondary condensation front in
a disc wind. These findings clearly deviated from the classical view of a
smooth, inclined circular rim centred on a single star, where the emission is
simply expected to be brightest and symmetric along the far side of the
projected rim due to self-shadowing of the near side
(e.g. Hofmann et al.,
2022
)
.
In this study, we aim to systematically investigate the morphological
complexity of post-AGB circumbinary disc inner rims. To this end, we present
the first systematic NIR interferometric imaging survey for a diverse sample
of targets, using observations taken with VLTI/PIONIER. Probing thermal
emission from the hot inner rim dust, we focus on the detection of any asymmetric
features possibly indicative of substructures induced by the central binary,
substellar companions, or hydrodynamical instabilities. The article is structured
as follows. We describe our targets in Sect.
2
and the
observations and data in Sect.
3
. Our image reconstruction
workflow is developed in Sect.
4
, and then applied to our
targets in Sect.
5
, where we describe the detected features. During this, we take into account multiple tests meant to assess the reliability of the image features.
The possible origins of the rim positions and detected features are discussed
in Sect.
6
. Finally, we summarise our results and present
our conclusions in Sect.
7
.
2
Target systems
Table 1
:
Properties of the target sample and their observations.
1
1
1
The binary period
P
orb
P_{\mathrm{orb}}
, projected primary semi-major axis
a
1
​
sin
⁡
i
bin
a_{1}\sin{i_{\mathrm{bin}}}
and mass function
f
​
(
m
)
f(m)
are derived from SB1 fitting by (1). When RV monitoring is unavailable – as marked by
†
\dagger
–
P
orb
P_{\mathrm{orb}}
is instead taken to be the period of the detected RVb phenomenon by (2). System distances
d
Gaia
d_{\mathrm{Gaia}}
are based on the Gaia DR3 ’geometric’ estimates by (3). Primary luminosities
L
∗
L_{*}
and effective temperatures
T
eff
SED
T_{\mathrm{eff}}^{\mathrm{SED}}
(formal uncertainty of
250
​
K
250\,\mathrm{K}
) are derived from the SED fits by (4). The errors on
L
∗
L_{*}
result from uncertainty on the total reddening. The primary’s
H
H
band spectral index
d
prim
d_{\mathrm{prim}}
(defined at
λ
0
=
1.65
​
μ
​
m
\lambda_{0}=1.65\,\mathrm{\mu m}
), is derived from a power-law fit to the de-reddened model spectrum. We also note detections of the RVb phenomenon, as found by (2), (5), (6) and (7).
Δ
​
t
obs
/
P
orb
\Delta t_{\mathrm{obs}}/P_{\mathrm{orb}}
denotes the ratio between the timespan within which the observations were taken and the binary period.
Name
IRAS ID
P
orb
P_{\mathrm{orb}}
a
1
​
sin
⁡
i
bin
a_{1}\sin{i_{\mathrm{bin}}}
f
​
(
m
)
f(m)
d
Gaia
d_{\mathrm{Gaia}}
L
∗
L_{*}
T
eff
SED
T_{\mathrm{eff}}^{\mathrm{SED}}
d
prim
d_{\mathrm{prim}}
RVb
Δ
​
t
obs
/
P
orb
\Delta t_{\mathrm{obs}}/P_{\mathrm{orb}}
Refs.
(
d
)
(\mathrm{d})
(
AU
)
\mathrm{(AU)}
(
M
⊙
)
\mathrm{(M_{\odot})}
(
kpc
)
\mathrm{(kpc)}
(
L
⊙
)
\mathrm{(L_{\odot})}
(
K
)
\mathrm{(K)}
ph.
(
%
)
\mathrm{(\%)}
AI~Sco
17530-3348
977
†
977^{\dagger}
–
–
2.9
−
0.3
+
0.5
2.9^{+0.5}_{-0.3}
5600
−
1400
+
1800
5600^{+1800}_{-1400}
4500
±
250
4500\pm 250
−
2.13
-2.13
y
3.3
3.3
2, 3. 4
EN~TrA
14524-6838
1488
±
9
1488\pm 9
2.11
±
0.09
2.11\pm 0.09
0.57
±
0.07
0.57\pm 0.07
2.7
−
0.3
+
0.2
2.7^{+0.2}_{-0.3}
2800
−
400
+
2500
2800^{+2500}_{-400}
5500
±
250
5500\pm 250
−
2.86
-2.86
n
1.9
1.9
1, 3, 4
HD~95767
11000-6153
1990
±
60
1990\pm 60
2.14
±
0.16
2.14\pm 0.16
0.33
±
0.07
0.33\pm 0.07
4.4
−
0.3
+
0.3
4.4^{+0.3}_{-0.3}
14 800
−
2500
+
15 500
14\,800_{-2500}^{+15\,500}
7100
±
250
7100\pm 250
−
3.19
-3.19
y
2.0
2.0
1, 3, 4, 7
HD~108015
12222-4652
906
±
6
906\pm 6
0.28
±
0.02
0.28\pm 0.02
0.0036
±
0.0009
0.0036\pm 0.0009
5.1
−
0.6
+
0.8
5.1^{+0.8}_{-0.6}
19 800
−
4400
+
5300
19\,800_{-4400}^{+5300}
6850
±
250
6850\pm 250
−
3.16
-3.16
n
5.0
5.0
1, 3, 4
HR~4049
10158-2844
430.6
±
0.1
430.6\pm 0.1
0.627
±
0.010
0.627\pm 0.010
0.177
±
0.008
0.177\pm 0.008
1.4
−
0.2
+
0.3
1.4^{+0.3}_{-0.2}
12 600
−
2000
+
8 200
12\,600_{-2000}^{+8\,200}
7200
±
250
7200\pm 250
−
3.14
-3.14
y
3.5
3.5
1, 2, 3, 4, 5
IRAS~15469-5311
–
390.2
±
0.7
390.2\pm 0.7
0.438
±
0.015
0.438\pm 0.015
0.074
±
0.008
0.074\pm 0.008
3.5
−
0.3
+
0.4
3.5^{+0.4}_{-0.3}
16 400
−
1400
+
11 900
16\,400^{+11\,900}_{-1400}
7000
±
250
7000\pm 250
−
3.17
-3.17
n
7.7
7.7
1, 3, 4
IW~Car
09256-6324
1449
†
1449^{\dagger}
–
–
1.310
−
0.070
+
0.060
1.310^{+0.060}_{-0.070}
5500
−
1800
+
4800
5500^{+4800}_{-1800}
6500
±
250
6500\pm 250
−
3.17
-3.17
y
5.6
5.6
2, 3, 4
PS~Gem
07008+1050
1288.6
±
0.3
1288.6\pm 0.3
1.507
±
0.034
1.507\pm 0.034
0.274
±
0.019
0.274\pm 0.019
1.8
−
0.1
+
0.1
1.8^{+0.1}_{-0.1}
3300
−
100
+
1100
3300^{+1100}_{-100}
6100
±
250
6100\pm 250
−
3.03
-3.03
y
8.7
8.7
1, 3, 4, 6
\tablebib
(1)
Oomen et al. (
2018
)
; (2)
Kiss & Bódi (
2017
)
; (3)
Bailer-Jones et al. (
2021
)
; (4)
Kluska et al. (
2022
)
; (5)
Waelkens et al. (
1991a
)
; (6)
Van Winckel et al. (
1999
)
; (7)
Kiss et al. (
2007
)
.
In this study, we present NIR
H
H
band interferometric imaging observations of
eight full disc post-AGB binaries. All observations were obtained within the ’INterferometric
Survey of Post-AGB binaries Interacting with their RING’ large programme at
the European Southern Observatory (INSPIRING, ESO 1103.D-0797, PI: J. Kluska).
The data were taken using the Precision Integrated-Optics Near-infrared
Imaging ExpeRiment
(PIONIER, Le Bouquin et al.,
2011
)
, mounted on the Very
Large Telescope Interferometer
(VLTI, Haguenauer et al.,
2010
)
. The target
selection is described below. Further details of the data and observations are
given in Sect.
3
.
The INSPIRING targets were selected out of the wider sample of
∼
85
\sim\!85
known Galactic disc-bearing post-AGB binaries
(Kluska et al.,
2022
)
. This was
based on the following selection criteria:
Criterion 1:
The target is observable with both PIONIER and GRAVITY – with analysis of the GRAVITY snapshot data being deferred to future work –
on the VLTI auxiliary telescopes (ATs), satisfying constraints on correlated
flux and sky position.
Criterion 2:
An estimated binary orbital period of
P
orb
>
1
​
yr
P_{\mathrm{orb}}>1\,\mathrm{yr}
(Table
1
),
permitting the necessary AT array configuration changes for imaging with minimal
orbital motion during the observing campaign (see Sect.
3
).
Criterion 3:
Clearly resolved circumstellar emission in prior PIONIER
snapshots
(Kluska et al.,
2019
)
, as shown by a long-baseline plateau in the squared
visibilities (
V
​
2
V2
, Sect.
3
).
Applying these criteria yielded 11 targets. In this work, we analysed eight of
these with clear disc contributions in their PIONIER data and excluded three –
IRAS 08544-4431, HR 4226, and U Mon – from our analysis. Briefly, IRAS 08544
−
-
4431
is reserved for a dedicated PIONIER time-series imaging; HR 4226 shows no
clear
H
H
band disc signal in PIONIER (though the outer disc is resolved with the
VLT/SPHERE imager by
Andrych et al.
2025
), and its small radial-velocity
amplitudes together with a relatively low effective temperature (
T
eff
≈
4000
​
K
T_{\rm eff}\!\approx\!4000\,\mathrm{K}
) cast doubt on its post-AGB classification
(Andrych et al.,
2025
)
.
Hence, we defer a separate, multi-wavelength study; and for U Mon the PIONIER observables
seemingly only probe the binary. The inner rim is likely further out and
colder, and hence undetectable in NIR, consistent with U Mon’s SED
categorisation as a possible transition disc system (
Kluska et al.
2022
,
with the outer disc being resolved with SPHERE by
Andrych et al.
2023
).
Based on their SEDs, the eight systems analysed in this work are all
classified as full discs by
Kluska et al. (
2022
)
, i.e. with inner rims close to the sublimation radius. This is a selection bias due to the natural tendency of this class of objects to have strong NIR excesses, and thus for the disc signal to be resolvable within PIONIER’s sensitivity limits in the first place. Nevertheless, they form a diverse
sample of post-AGB binaries, covering a broad range in orbital period, stellar
effective temperature and luminosity, refractory depletion level and previous
inclination angle estimates. The main target properties relevant to our analysis
and interpretation are summarised in Table
1
.
For completeness, we give extensive descriptions of pertinent results from previous
literature on these targets in Appendix
A
.
3
Data and observations
For our eight targets (Sect.
2
),
we obtained VLTI/PIONIER
(Le Bouquin et al.,
2011
)
observations in the
H
H
band
using the ATs in various configurations. A grism disperses the light into six spectral
channels (
R
∼
30
R\!\sim\!30
;
1.50
−
1.80
​
μ
​
m
1.50-\!1.80\,\mu\mathrm{m}
). Each PIONIER integration
delivers six baseline squared visibility (
V
​
2
V2
) and four (of which three are
independent) triplet closure phase (
ϕ
​
3
\phi 3
) measurements for every spectral channel.
While the former is sensitive to the radial intensity dependence of the source
along different directions, the latter constrains its point-asymmetry. Each
target was assigned six K-type giant calibrators at on-sky separations of
<
5
∘
<5^{\circ}
found using SearchCal
2
2
2
https://www.jmmc.fr/searchcal
(Chelli et al.,
2016
)
, excluding objects with uncertain luminosity class,
known variability, or multiplicity. Every two science observations were
bracketed – in a CAL-SCI-CAL-SCI-CAL sequence – by observations of three
different calibrators.
To enable imaging, the observations were taken using various AT configurations
(baselines spanning
∼
10
−
130
​
m
\sim\!10-\!130\,\mathrm{m}
) to properly fill the spatial
frequency plane (also called the
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
plane). We retrieved all reduced and
calibrated INSPIRING observations from the Jean-Marie Mariotti Center Optical
Interferometry Database (OiDB)
3
3
3
http://oidb.jmmc.fr
. The data
were reduced using the standard pndrs
4
4
4
http://www.jmmc.fr/pionier
data reduction package
(Le Bouquin et al.,
2011
)
. We then filtered the observations
based on any severe problems with fringe tracking, weather conditions, etc.
Observations showing a less than optimal ESO quality control grade (i.e. grade
B or C) were manually checked. Any such observations that still presented good
quality data on
>
4
>4
baseline pairs were kept. Some observations were graded poor
due to
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
plane overlap with previous observations, while still showing
excellent data quality.
To minimise the effects of orbital motion and variable illumination on the
inner disc, we carefully selected observations within the smallest possible time
window that still provided adequate
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage for imaging. This
strategy avoids merging widely separated epochs, which could otherwise introduce
time-dependent signatures. The fractional time-span of the selected
observations relative to the orbital period,
Δ
​
t
obs
/
P
orb
\Delta t_{\rm obs}/P_{\rm orb}
,
is typically only a few per cent (Table
1
),
ensuring that orbital smearing has a limited impact on the reconstructed morphologies.
Logs of the selected observations including the observational conditions and
calibrators are available online on
Zenodo
. The
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverages, dirty beams (i.e. the point spread functions, the centre of which
forms the formal resolution element called the ’beam size’) and corresponding
V
​
2
V2
and
ϕ
​
3
\phi 3
data are shown in Figs.
1
,
15
&
14
, respectively.
Figure 1
:
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage for the targets’ selected data. Observations are
denoted by scattered circles, coloured by their wavelength.
4
Methodology
Given that the inner disc regions are expected to be morphologically
complex, the principal aim of the analysis is to produce non-parametric image
reconstructions of the circumstellar environment. Our imaging workflow makes
use of the SPARCO formalism, which we describe in Sect.
4.1
.
To provide initial estimates on the different SPARCO parameters (flux ratios,
chromaticities and positions), we perform a simplified geometric modelling of
our targets in Sect.
4.2
. Lastly, our image reconstruction
workflow itself is described in Sect.
4.3
.
4.1
The SPARCO visibility formalism
In the
H
H
band, the primary star presents itself
as a bright central emission, while the disc emission is much more diffuse. In
addition, the data show strong chromaticity, caused by the relative flux change
between the primary and disc (revealed by the strong
V
​
2
V2
slopes across
wavelength channels in Fig.
14
). We addressed these challenges
by adopting the Semi-Parametric Approach for Reconstruction of Chromatic Objects
(SPARCO, Kluska et al.,
2014
)
. SPARCO defines the total source visibility
V
~
​
(
u
,
v
)
\tilde{V}(u,v)
as a flux-weighted combination of the central stars and the circumstellar
environment:
V
~
tot
​
(
u
,
v
,
λ
)
\displaystyle\tilde{V}_{\mathrm{tot}}(u,v,\lambda)
=
\displaystyle=
∑
j
f
j
​
(
λ
)
​
V
~
j
​
(
u
,
v
)
∑
j
f
j
​
(
λ
)
,
\displaystyle\frac{\sum_{j}f_{j}(\lambda)\tilde{V}_{j}(u,v)}{\sum_{j}f_{j}(\lambda)},
(1)
f
j
​
(
λ
)
\displaystyle f_{j}(\lambda)
=
\displaystyle=
f
j
,
0
​
(
λ
/
λ
0
)
d
j
,
\displaystyle f_{j,0}\left(\lambda/\lambda_{0}\right)^{d_{j}},
(2)
∑
j
f
j
,
0
\displaystyle\sum_{j}f_{j,0}
=
\displaystyle=
1
,
\displaystyle 1,
(3)
where
j
j
represents a component – in our case the primary star, secondary
star or disc rim – and
f
j
f_{j}
its spectrum. Following
Kluska et al.
2019
,
we defined the spectrum by a spectral index
d
j
d_{j}
and flux fraction
f
j
,
0
f_{j,0}
at reference wavelength
λ
0
=
1.65
​
μ
​
m
\lambda_{0}\!=\!1.65\,\mathrm{\mu m}
. This
assumes constant component morphologies across wavelength channels, which is
reasonable for the narrow
H
H
band. The essence of SPARCO is then to approximate
the central stars in Eq.
1
using closed-form
geometric components, while applying an image reconstruction algorithm to recover
just the disc rim
V
~
rim
​
(
u
,
v
)
\tilde{V}_{\mathrm{rim}}(u,v)
. This greatly reduces the
required pixel dynamic range and allows us to use data from all wavelength
channels simultaneously, significantly improving image fidelity and the capability to spatially separate the central stars from the disc rim.
Throughout the remainder of this work, we refer to the central star geometric
parameters as the ’SPARCO parameters’. We modelled the primary as a uniform disc
centred at the origin and the secondary as a point source. The SPARCO
parameters are then the primary’s flux fraction
f
prim
,
0
f_{\mathrm{prim,0}}
, uniform
diameter
UD
prim
\mathrm{UD}_{\mathrm{prim}}
and spectral index
d
prim
d_{\mathrm{prim}}
,
the disc spectral index
d
rim
d_{\mathrm{rim}}
, and the secondary’s flux fraction
f
sec
,
0
f_{\mathrm{sec,0}}
and position
(
Δ
​
α
sec
,
Δ
​
δ
sec
)
(\Delta\alpha_{\mathrm{sec}},\Delta\delta_{\mathrm{sec}})
. Throughout our analysis, we fixed
d
prim
d_{\mathrm{prim}}
to the value derived
from the SED fit (Table
1
). This is
because our data are only sensitive to relative flux differences between
components. The SPARCO parameter values need fine-tuning in order to properly reveal
the circumstellar environment
(cf. Kluska et al.,
2014
,
2016
,
2020a
)
.
We combined SPARCO with an image reconstruction algorithm and a SPARCO
parameter optimisation routine into a consistent image reconstruction workflow,
which we describe in Sect.
4.3
. To proceed with image reconstruction,
however, we first required preliminary estimates on the SPARCO parameters,
which we obtained via a simplified geometric modelling of the binary and inner
rim.
4.2
Initial SPARCO estimates via geometric modelling
To provide a first estimate of the SPARCO
parameters, we fitted simple geometric models to the data using PMOIRED
5
5
5
https://github.com/amerand/PMOIRED
(Mérand,
2022
)
. PMOIRED allows the
user to flexibly define the source morphology as a combination of parametrised
components. We adopted the visibility model of Eq.
1
.
This step of the analysis is designed to provide initial estimates of the SPARCO
parameters (Sect.
4.1
), as these provide crucial input
for our imaging workflow.
PMOIRED fits parameters by minimising the reduced
χ
ν
2
\chi^{2}_{\nu}
using a Levenberg-Marquardt
algorithm
(Marquardt,
1963
)
. To avoid local minima, we opted to
gradually increase our model complexity, using the best fit from the previous model
as a starting point for the next (similar to the strategy adopted by
Kluska et al.
2019
).
We proceeded through the following stages:
Step 1: primary and symmetric power law disc
. Assuming a maximum primary
stellar diameter of
300
​
R
⊙
300\,\mathrm{R_{\odot}}
(e.g. Bollen et al.,
2022
)
, we fitted
it using a uniform disc of diameter
UD
prim
\mathrm{UD}_{\mathrm{prim}}
, on the
condition that the corresponding angular size of the maximum stellar diameter
is above half of the interferometric beam size. If lower, we modelled the
primary as a point source. The inner disc rim was modelled as an azimuthally symmetric disc with a radial
power law surface brightness. It is inclined with
inclination
i
rim
i_{\mathrm{rim}}
and oriented by position angle
PA
rim
\mathrm{PA}_{\mathrm{rim}}
,
defined anti-clockwise from north to east. We note that the derived inclination assumes a circular rim, where the only source of ellipticity is its on-sky projection.
The rim is further defined by its flux fraction
f
disc
,
0
f_{\mathrm{disc,0}}
, inner diameter
θ
rim
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}
(interior to which the intensity is zero), outer diameter
θ
out
\theta_{\mathrm{out}}
, radial brightness power index
ρ
rim
\rho_{\mathrm{rim}}
and spectral index
d
rim
d_{\mathrm{rim}}
.
θ
out
\theta_{\mathrm{out}}
is fixed to an angular
size corresponding to
300
​
AU
300\,\mathrm{AU}
. Our data only probe the inner disc,
so its value has little effect on the results. Both components were centred at
(
0
,
0
)
(0,0)
.
In addition, we added a grey over-resolved background of flux
f
bkg
,
0
f_{\mathrm{bkg,0}}
,
on the condition that it improves the short baseline
V
​
2
V2
residuals and causes
a decrease of the Bayesian information criterion
(BIC, Schwarz,
1978
)
Δ
​
BIC
<
−
100
\Delta\mathrm{BIC}<-100
. We adopted this conservative BIC threshold (a more common
choice is
Δ
​
BIC
<
−
10
\Delta\mathrm{BIC}\!<\!-10
) because the errors on PIONIER data
can be underestimated (as is generally the case for interferometric instruments,
e.g.
Monnier et al.
2012
; GRAVITY Collaboration et al.
2019
), and more lenient thresholds
often resulted in overfitting.
Step 2: primary with offset and azimuthally modulated disc
. The disc
centre was offset from the primary by
(
Δ
​
α
rim
,
Δ
​
δ
rim
)
(\Delta\alpha_{\mathrm{rim}},\Delta\delta_{\mathrm{rim}})
. In another fit,
the disc brightness was azimuthally modulated using a first order harmonic, as
described by its amplitude
A
mod
,
1
A_{\mathrm{mod,1}}
and position angle relative to
the
PA
\mathrm{PA}
of the rim
ψ
mod
,
1
\psi_{\mathrm{mod,1}}
. Each complexity increase
was again only accepted if
Δ
​
BIC
<
−
100
\Delta\mathrm{BIC}\!<\!-100
.
Step 3: binary with offset and azimuthally modulated disc
. A grey
point-source secondary companion was added to the fit (chromatic companions did
not improve the
BIC
\mathrm{BIC}
). It is defined by its flux fraction
f
sec
,
0
f_{\mathrm{sec,0}}
and offset from the primary
(
Δ
​
α
sec
,
Δ
​
δ
sec
)
(\Delta\alpha_{\mathrm{sec}},\Delta\delta_{\mathrm{sec}})
(initially set to the disc centre found in step 2). We stress that the
secondary’s flux is likely not photospheric, instead originating from jet-launching
circumcompanion accretion discs
(e.g. Hillen et al.,
2016
; Bollen et al.,
2022
; Verhamme et al.,
2024
; De Prins et al.,
2024
)
.
We added this component only if
Δ
​
BIC
<
−
100
\Delta\mathrm{BIC}\!<\!-100
.
Step 4: correction of the secondary detection via preliminary reconstructions
.
Due to our simplistic model of the inner rim (including only a first order
azimuthal modulation), step 3 can be highly degenerate and prone to placing a
secondary at unphysical positions, mimicking rim morphology features. As a
result, we included a feedback step from the image reconstructions in order to
validate the secondary detections, and, if necessary, repeated step 3 with a
corrected initial secondary position. We provide a further description of this
feedback step in Sect.
4.3.4
.
Table 2
:
Best fit parameters of the final geometric models.
6
6
6
$a$
$a$
footnotetext:
Different parametrisations can have different biases in the rim diameter. To facilitate comparison with other geometric and RT models (e.g.
Corporaal et al.
2023b
), we also calculated the disc half-light radius,
r
hl
r_{\mathrm{hl}}
, using elliptical apertures following the inner rim orientation. It is a more robust tracer of the overall rim emission size
(cf. Varga et al.,
2021
)
.
$b$
$b$
footnotetext:
For HR 4049 and possibly PS Gem,
r
hl
r_{\mathrm{hl}}
is strongly overestimated, likely because the rim model tries partially account for an over-resolved flux component (causing their high
ρ
rim
\rho_{\mathrm{rim}}
values). Their
r
hl
r_{\mathrm{hl}}
and
ρ
rim
\rho_{\mathrm{rim}}
values should be treated with caution.
Target
χ
ν
2
\chi^{2}_{\nu}
f
prim
,
0
f_{\mathrm{prim},0}
UD
prim
\mathrm{UD}_{\mathrm{prim}}
f
bg
,
0
f_{\mathrm{bg},0}
f
sec
,
0
f_{\mathrm{sec},0}
Δ
​
α
sec
\Delta\alpha_{\mathrm{sec}}
Δ
​
δ
sec
\Delta\delta_{\mathrm{sec}}
θ
rim
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}
i
rim
i_{\mathrm{rim}}
PA
rim
\mathrm{PA}_{\mathrm{rim}}
Δ
​
α
rim
\Delta\alpha_{\mathrm{rim}}
Δ
​
δ
rim
\Delta\delta_{\mathrm{rim}}
ρ
rim
\rho_{\mathrm{rim}}
d
rim
d_{\mathrm{rim}}
A
mod
,
1
A_{\mathrm{mod},1}
ψ
mod
,
1
\psi_{\mathrm{mod},1}
r
hl
r_{\mathrm{hl}}
a\,a
a\,a
footnotemark:
a
\,a
(
%
)
(\%)
(
mas
)
(\mathrm{mas})
(
%
)
(\%)
(
%
)
(\%)
(
mas
)
\mathrm{(mas)}
(
mas
)
\mathrm{(mas)}
(
mas
)
(\mathrm{mas})
(
∘
)
(^{\circ})
(
∘
)
(^{\circ})
(
mas
)
(\mathrm{mas})
(
mas
)
(\mathrm{mas})
(
∘
)
(^{\circ})
(
mas
)
(\mathrm{mas})
AI Sco
4.98
4.98
68.1
−
0.4
+
0.4
68.1^{+0.4}_{-0.4}
–
–
5.9
−
0.2
+
0.2
5.9^{+0.2}_{-0.2}
−
1.08
−
0.03
+
0.04
-1.08^{+0.04}_{-0.03}
−
1.38
−
0.06
+
0.06
-1.38^{+0.06}_{-0.06}
5.83
−
0.07
+
0.09
5.83^{+0.09}_{-0.07}
45.6
−
1.6
+
2.0
45.6^{+2.0}_{-1.6}
60
−
5
+
7
60^{+7}_{-5}
−
0.53
−
0.11
+
0.07
-0.53^{+0.07}_{-0.11}
−
1.86
−
0.09
+
0.12
-1.86^{+0.12}_{-0.09}
−
6.7
−
0.9
+
0.7
-6.7^{+0.7}_{-0.9}
0.2
−
0.2
+
0.2
0.2^{+0.2}_{-0.2}
0.87
−
0.05
+
0.05
0.87^{+0.05}_{-0.05}
−
9
−
5
+
4
-9^{+4}_{-5}
3.41
−
0.08
+
0.09
3.41^{+0.09}_{-0.08}
EN TrA
2.40
2.40
72.1
−
0.4
+
0.4
72.1^{+0.4}_{-0.4}
–
–
5.0
−
0.2
+
0.2
5.0^{+0.2}_{-0.2}
−
0.70
−
0.02
+
0.02
-0.70^{+0.02}_{-0.02}
−
1.65
−
0.04
+
0.04
-1.65^{+0.04}_{-0.04}
5.63
−
0.14
+
0.16
5.63^{+0.16}_{-0.14}
58.9
−
1.2
+
1.1
58.9^{+1.1}_{-1.2}
32.5
−
1.7
+
1.9
32.5^{+1.9}_{-1.7}
−
1.13
−
0.07
+
0.07
-1.13^{+0.07}_{-0.07}
−
1.15
−
0.12
+
0.11
-1.15^{+0.11}_{-0.12}
−
3.97
−
0.10
+
0.10
-3.97^{+0.10}_{-0.10}
4.37
−
0.11
+
0.11
4.37^{+0.11}_{-0.11}
0.72
−
0.04
+
0.04
0.72^{+0.04}_{-0.04}
−
13
−
4
+
4
-13^{+4}_{-4}
4.02
−
0.08
+
0.09
4.02^{+0.09}_{-0.08}
HD 95767
1.97
1.97
48.5
−
0.7
+
0.7
48.5^{+0.7}_{-0.7}
–
–
21.0
−
0.7
+
0.7
21.0^{+0.7}_{-0.7}
−
0.719
−
0.013
+
0.013
-0.719^{+0.013}_{-0.013}
−
0.510
−
0.009
+
0.009
-0.510^{+0.009}_{-0.009}
4.67
−
0.04
+
0.05
4.67^{+0.05}_{-0.04}
25.6
−
1.7
+
1.7
25.6^{+1.7}_{-1.7}
14
−
4
+
4
14^{+4}_{-4}
0.11
−
0.03
+
0.04
0.11^{+0.04}_{-0.03}
−
0.61
−
0.03
+
0.04
-0.61^{+0.04}_{-0.03}
−
3.83
0.03
+
0.03
-3.83^{+0.03}_{0.03}
6.39
−
0.08
+
0.08
6.39^{+0.08}_{-0.08}
0.451
−
0.020
+
0.019
0.451^{+0.019}_{-0.020}
43
−
4
+
4
43^{+4}_{-4}
3.41
−
0.03
+
0.03
3.41^{+0.03}_{-0.03}
HD 108015
2.08
2.08
61.8
−
0.3
+
0.3
61.8^{+0.3}_{-0.3}
–
8.6
−
0.4
+
0.5
8.6^{+0.5}_{-0.4}
–
–
–
5.63
−
0.03
+
0.03
5.63^{+0.03}_{-0.03}
31.2
−
0.8
+
0.7
31.2^{+0.7}_{-0.8}
82.5
−
1.1
+
1.2
82.5^{+1.2}_{-1.1}
−
0.612
−
0.017
+
0.018
-0.612^{+0.018}_{-0.017}
0.53
−
0.02
+
0.02
0.53^{+0.02}_{-0.02}
−
5.64
−
0.12
+
0.10
-5.64^{+0.10}_{-0.12}
7.09
−
0.08
+
0.09
7.09^{+0.09}_{-0.08}
0.502
−
0.007
+
0.008
0.502^{+0.008}_{-0.007}
−
66
−
2
+
2
-66^{+2}_{-2}
3.419
−
0.014
+
0.014
3.419^{+0.014}_{-0.014}
HR 4049
b\,b
b\,b
footnotemark:
b
\,b
1.71
1.71
65.92
−
0.14
+
0.14
65.92^{+0.14}_{-0.14}
0.74
−
0.02
0.02
0.74^{0.02}_{-0.02}
–
0.42
−
0.05
+
0.05
0.42^{+0.05}_{-0.05}
−
1.70
−
0.08
+
0.07
-1.70^{+0.07}_{-0.08}
−
0.69
−
0.09
+
0.10
-0.69^{+0.10}_{-0.09}
14.33
−
0.18
+
0.16
14.33^{+0.16}_{-0.18}
56.8
−
1.0
+
1.0
56.8^{+1.0}_{-1.0}
82.32
−
0.8
+
1.0
82.32^{+1.0}_{-0.8}
−
1.70
−
0.08
+
0.07
-1.70^{+0.07}_{-0.08}
−
0.69
−
0.09
+
0.10
-0.69^{+0.10}_{-0.09}
−
2.73
−
0.05
+
0.04
-2.73^{+0.04}_{-0.05}
7.90
−
0.07
+
0.07
7.90^{+0.07}_{-0.07}
0.42
−
0.03
+
0.03
0.42^{+0.03}_{-0.03}
−
38
−
3
+
3
-38^{+3}_{-3}
15.44
−
0.45
+
0.46
15.44^{+0.46}_{-0.45}
IRAS 15469-5311
2.08
2.08
59.5
−
0.6
+
0.7
59.5^{+0.7}_{-0.6}
–
11.1
−
1.1
+
1.2
11.1^{+1.2}_{-1.1}
–
–
–
7.80
−
0.06
+
0.05
7.80^{+0.05}_{-0.06}
40.2
−
0.7
+
0.8
40.2^{+0.8}_{-0.7}
53.5
−
1.1
+
1.0
53.5^{+1.0}_{-1.1}
0.31
−
0.03
+
0.03
0.31^{+0.03}_{-0.03}
−
0.39
−
0.02
+
0.02
-0.39^{+0.02}_{-0.02}
−
4.84
−
0.14
+
0.13
-4.84^{+0.13}_{-0.14}
8.51
−
0.19
+
0.21
8.51^{+0.21}_{-0.19}
0.86
−
0.02
+
0.02
0.86^{+0.02}_{-0.02}
74.6
−
1.5
+
1.6
74.6^{+1.6}_{-1.5}
5.00
−
0.05
+
0.05
5.00^{+0.05}_{-0.05}
PS Gem
b\,b
b\,b
footnotemark:
b
\,b
0.94
0.94
89.01
−
0.14
+
0.14
89.01^{+0.14}_{-0.14}
0.44
−
0.02
+
0.02
0.44^{+0.02}_{-0.02}
–
–
–
–
8.4
−
0.6
+
0.6
8.4^{+0.6}_{-0.6}
39
−
7
+
6
39^{+6}_{-7}
156
−
6
+
5
156^{+5}_{-6}
–
–
−
2.79
−
0.17
+
0.22
-2.79^{+0.22}_{-0.17}
4.3
−
0.2
+
0.2
4.3^{+0.2}_{-0.2}
0.65
−
0.05
+
0.06
0.65^{+0.06}_{-0.05}
35
−
11
+
9
35^{+9}_{-11}
9.1
−
0.8
+
1.3
9.1^{+1.3}_{-0.8}
Parameter uncertainties on the final geometric models were obtained via bootstrapping
(Efron,
1979
)
, using
20 000
20\,000
samples. The only target to which we
could not fit a geometric model is IW Car, as its complex morphology proved unable
to be reproduced with a single-disc model (see also Fig.
4
).
We tested two-disc models for IW Car, but these resulted in ill-conditioned
solutions with large parameter degeneracies, providing no meaningful constraints
as the PMOIRED minimisation engine became immediately trapped in local minima.
We therefore restricted our analysis to single-disc models for compatibility
across the sample. The parameters of our final geometric model fits are found in
Table
2
. The corresponding model disc images are
presented in Fig.
8
, though we note that the images are not used as initial starting points for the image reconstructions.
4.3
Image reconstruction workflow
Image reconstruction allows us to represent the source morphology
in a non-parametric way, providing a powerful tool for discovering unexpected
features whose presence could be difficult to decidedly infer using parametric
models. However, sparse
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverages and non-linearity between source
morphology and observables make it an ill-posed, non-convex inverse problem
(Thiébaut & Young,
2017
)
.
As a result, the loss function to be minimised is typically formulated in a
Bayesian way:
ℒ
tot
=
ℒ
data
+
μ
​
ℒ
reg
,
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{tot}}=\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{data}}+\mu\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{reg}},
(4)
consisting of both a data loss
ℒ
data
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{data}}
and a prior-like regularisation
function
ℒ
reg
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{reg}}
. Many different images can fit the data
well, leading to low
ℒ
data
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{data}}
despite not being astrophysically
valid. The role of
ℒ
reg
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{reg}}
is to reign in the
reconstruction, guiding it toward images with certain qualitative properties.
Its relative numerical weight in the reconstruction is set via the
regularisation weight
μ
\mu
.
4.3.1
ORGANIC image reconstruction
For our image reconstructions, we utilised the
ORGANIC
7
7
7
https://github.com/DePrinsT/organic
algorithm
(Claes et al.,
2020
)
.
It uses a Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN, Goodfellow et al.,
2014
)
– a type
of convolutional neural network (CNN) – to encode RT models as physically
informed priors for image reconstruction. Specifically, ORGANIC is trained on
an extensive grid of
H
H
and
K
K
band thermal dust emission models of
symmetric disc rims, simulated using the MCMax
8
8
8
https://github.com/michielmin/MCMax3D
RT code
(Min et al.,
2009
)
. We briefly describe the ORGANIC algorithm below, but
refer interested readers to
Claes et al. (
2020
)
for more details.
The GAN architecture consists of a ’generator’ and a ’discriminator’. The generator
takes a size
100
100
latent Gaussian noise vector and maps it to a
128
×
128
128\!\times\!128
image. The discriminator takes a
128
×
128
128\!\times\!128
image and maps it to
a scalar score
s
^
∈
[
0
,
1
]
\hat{s}\in[0,1]
. The overall ORGANIC algorithm consists of the
following two steps:
Step 1: initial training
. The generator and discriminator are iteratively
and alternately trained. In each training step, the generator produces a batch
of ’fake’ images using a set of random input noise vectors. These are
presented to the discriminator together with a batch of ’real’ images from the
RT training set. In alternating fashion, the generator is trained to deceive
the discriminator into evaluating its images as real (aiming at a discriminator
score
s
^
∼
1
\hat{s}\!\sim\!1
for its images), while the discriminator is trained to
discern the ’fake’ generator images from the ’real’ RT ones (aiming for
s
^
∼
0
\hat{s}\!\sim\!0
and
s
^
∼
1
\hat{s}\!\sim\!1
for the generated and RT images, respectively).
When properly trained, this adversarial game converges to a state where the
generator produces an image distribution similar to the RT models
(Goodfellow et al.,
2014
)
.
Step 2: image reconstruction.
The GAN can then be confronted
with any set of
V
​
2
V2
and
ϕ
​
3
\phi 3
data. With the discriminator fixed, the
generator starts from a random latent noise vector. This essentially corresponds to drawing a random initial image similar to the RT training images. The generator
is then further trained to minimise Eq.
4
by directly
updating the weights in its convolutional kernels. The loss terms are now:
ℒ
data
\displaystyle\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{data}}
=
\displaystyle=
l
V
​
2
+
l
ϕ
​
3
N
V
​
2
+
N
ϕ
​
3
,
\displaystyle\frac{l_{V2}+l_{\phi 3}}{N_{V2}+N_{\phi 3}},
(5)
l
V
​
2
\displaystyle l_{V2}
=
\displaystyle=
∑
i
=
1
N
V
​
2
(
V
​
2
obs
,
i
−
V
​
2
img
,
i
)
2
σ
V
​
2
,
i
2
=
χ
V
​
2
2
,
\displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^{N_{V2}}\frac{(V2_{\mathrm{{obs,i}}}-V2_{\mathrm{{img,i}}})^{2}}{\sigma_{V2,i}^{2}}=\chi^{2}_{V2},
(6)
l
ϕ
​
3
\displaystyle l_{\phi 3}
=
\displaystyle=
∑
i
=
1
N
ϕ
​
3
2
​
(
1
−
cos
⁡
(
ϕ
​
3
obs
,
i
−
ϕ
​
3
img
,
i
)
)
σ
ϕ
​
3
.
i
2
,
\displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^{N_{\phi 3}}\frac{2\left(1-\cos{(\phi 3_{\mathrm{{obs,i}}}-\phi 3_{\mathrm{{img,i}}}})\right)}{\sigma_{\phi 3.i}^{2}},
(7)
ℒ
reg
\displaystyle\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{reg}}
=
\displaystyle=
−
ln
⁡
s
^
img
,
\displaystyle-\ln{\hat{s}_{\mathrm{img}}},
(8)
with the subscripts ’img’ and ’obs’ respectively denoting the generated image
and the observed data.
N
V
​
2
N_{V2}
and
N
ϕ
​
3
N_{\phi 3}
are the number of observed
V
​
2
V2
and
ϕ
​
3
\phi 3
points, and
l
V
​
2
l_{V2}
and
l
ϕ
​
3
l_{\phi 3}
the corresponding data losses.
We assumed a Von Mises distribution for
ϕ
​
3
\phi 3
in order to account for its angular
nature. The goal
of
ℒ
reg
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{reg}}
is to make the final images look more like the
RT training models. However, most of the regulatory properties of ORGANIC are implicitly
inherited from the CNN architecture and the initial training. We demonstrate
and discuss this in Appendix
C
.
To account for the random nature of the starting vector, ORGANIC repeats this
step for
N
restart
N_{\mathrm{restart}}
different random generator inputs. We set
N
restart
=
50
N_{\mathrm{restart}\!}=\!50
. This results in an image cube, the median of which is adopted as the final
image. The standard deviation along the cube for each pixel
j
j
,
σ
restart
,
j
\sigma_{\mathrm{restart},j}
,
then represents the uncertainty induced by the choice of latent vector. Regardless,
some of the
N
restart
N_{\mathrm{restart}}
images in the cube are badly converged, ending
up in poor local minima. To account for this, we added a procedure using principal
component analysis
(e.g. Gewers et al.,
2021
)
and k-means clustering
(Lloyd,
1982
)
to filter out these images from the cube. We applied PCA to the image cube, retaining
15 components to reduce dimensionality (accounting for
∼
70
−
80
%
\sim\!70-80\%
of the
inter-image variance). We then applied k-means clustering with three clusters
on the PCA subspace, discarding the cluster with the worst median
ℒ
tot
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{tot}}
.
This proved highly effective in singling out poorly converged images.
Figure 2
:
Peak-normalised IW Car ORGANIC image without a SPARCO secondary. We
identify a strong unresolved flux peak as flux from the secondary. The
primary is marked by a gold star, while a green dot marks the centre of an elliptical
Gaussian fit to the peak. The interferometric beam size and a
5
​
AU
5\,\mathrm{AU}
scale bar are shown in the bottom.
4.3.2
SPARCO optimisation
We applied ORGANIC in combination with the SPARCO
approach. Our binaries can have up to six free SPARCO parameters:
f
prim
,
0
f_{\mathrm{prim,0}}
,
UD
prim
\mathrm{UD}_{\mathrm{prim}}
,
d
rim
d_{\mathrm{rim}}
,
f
sec
,
0
f_{\mathrm{sec,0}}
,
Δ
​
α
sec
\Delta\alpha_{\mathrm{sec}}
and
Δ
​
δ
sec
\Delta\delta_{\mathrm{sec}}
(Sect.
4.1
).
This made the computational cost of grid searches
(e.g. Kluska et al.,
2016
,
2020a
)
prohibitive. We instead made use of the BADS
9
9
9
Its Python interface, pyBADS
(Singh & Acerbi,
2024
)
, is available at
https://github.com/acerbilab/pybads
optimisation algorithm
(Acerbi & Ma,
2017
)
, running ORGANIC for each
considered set of SPARCO parameters and choosing the one with the lowest value
of
ℒ
tot
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{tot}}
(Eq.
4
) on the resulting
image. BADS alternates between a broader systematic grid search stage and a
fast, detailed local search using a Gaussian process
surrogate for
ℒ
tot
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{tot}}
(e.g. Rasmussen & Williams,
2006
)
. It is highly efficient in the required
amount of ORGANIC runs and can readily escape shallow local minima.
We took the initial SPARCO parameter values from the corresponding final geometric
models in Table
2
(after validation and correction of
the secondary position from preliminary imaging; see Sect.
4.3.4
).
Initial tests showed that BADS+ORGANIC had the tendency to place the secondary
at non-physical positions and heavily reduce its flux contribution, instead placing
a slightly smeared flux in the image reconstruction at the true secondary position.
This is likely because the binary motion causes the secondary to better fit
the data as a slightly smeared Gaussian instead of a point source. As a result,
we fixed
(
Δ
​
α
sec
,
Δ
​
δ
sec
)
(\Delta\alpha_{\mathrm{sec}},\Delta\delta_{\mathrm{sec}})
to
their final geometric model values (Table
2
), leaving only
f
prim
,
0
f_{\mathrm{prim,0}}
,
UD
prim
\mathrm{UD}_{\mathrm{prim}}
,
d
rim
d_{\mathrm{rim}}
and
f
sec
,
0
f_{\mathrm{sec,0}}
free.
Since we could not fit a geometric model for IW Car, the secondary position
was instead fully inferred from a Gaussian fit to the strong unresolved flux
peak in a BADS+ORGANIC run omitting the secondary star SPARCO component, which
is identified as emission from the secondary
(cf. Hillen et al.,
2016
)
. This resulted
in
(
Δ
​
α
sec
,
Δ
​
δ
sec
)
=
(
1.12
,
−
1.90
)
​
mas
(\Delta\alpha_{\mathrm{sec}},\Delta\delta_{\mathrm{sec}})\!=\!(1.12,-1.90)\,\mathrm{mas}
(Fig.
2
). The other initial values were
set to the fit values of
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
, derived from PIONIER snapshot
data.
4.3.3
Selection of the regularisation weight and pixel scale
As optimisation of
μ
\mu
via the usual L-curve method
(e.g. Renard et al.,
2011
)
is prohibited due to the current ORGANIC architecture (see the discussion in Appendix
C
), we performed manual exploration in a reasonable range (
μ
=
0.1
−
2
\mu=0.1\!-\!2
). Finding the same main recovered features for different values (see also Fig.
11
), we fixed
μ
=
0.2
\mu=0.2
during our imaging workflow for all targets. This value generally provided a good balance between suppression of reconstruction artefacts while avoiding excessive over-regularisation, which can tend to make the rims too sharp.
Starting from images with a pixel scale corresponding to Nyquist sampling (two pixels fitting in the beam size) we gradually increased the sampling factor. We applied the BADS optimisation each time, until all discs were deemed properly resolved with
∼
20
−
30
\sim\!20-30
pixels across the inner rim diameter. During this, we took care to ensure the
128
×
128
128\!\times\!128
pixel field-of-view (set by the architecture of ORGANIC) contained all of the rim’s flux.
4.3.4
Correction of the secondary detection
Due to the simplistic
geometric model used for the disc rim, step 3 in the geometric modelling (Sect.
4.2
)
can initially fit faulty secondary positions. As a result, we first validated
the secondary detection by performing preliminary BADS+ORGANIC runs where the
secondary was omitted from the SPARCO parameters (i.e.
f
sec
=
0
f_{\mathrm{sec}}\!=\!0
).
In the resulting image reconstructions, the secondary emission, if significant,
appears as a clear unresolved flux contribution (as seen in Fig.
2
for IW Car). If the model secondary position proved to be mimicking features of
the disc rim, we reran the geometric fitting step 3 with a corrected initial
position to procure the final geometric models. For HD 108015 the geometric companion
detection was fully spurious, and the final geometric model was instead taken
from step 2.
4.3.5
Uncertainty estimation
After optimising the SPARCO parameters using
BADS, we performed a final bootstrap procedure with
500
500
resampled datasets, applying
ORGANIC to each and storing the resulting final median image in a cube. The
standard deviation along this cube was then adopted as the uncertainty induced
by the data,
σ
boot
,
j
\sigma_{\mathrm{boot},j}
. This was added in quadrature to the
restart-induced error,
σ
restart
,
j
\sigma_{\mathrm{restart},j}
, of the image
reconstructed on the original dataset to provide the total error for each
pixel
j
j
, i.e.
σ
t
​
o
​
t
,
j
=
σ
restart
,
j
2
+
σ
boot
,
j
2
\sigma_{tot,j}\!=\!\sqrt{\smash[b]{\sigma_{\mathrm{restart},j}^{2}+\sigma_{\mathrm{boot},j}^{2}}}
.
This total error was used to calculate any significance contours.
4.3.6
Workflow and image feature validation
We have implemented an extensive suite of tests to validate our imaging workflow and assess the robustness of features detected in the final images.
In Appendix
B
, we applied our full imaging workflow on synthetic datasets, derived from the PMOIRED model images, to identify potential biases in the inner rim parameters and the general position of azimuthal brightness enhancements. Appendix
D
presents image reconstructions performed with the more classical SQUEEZE reconstruction package
(Baron et al.,
2010
)
. The physics-informed regularisation capabilities of ORGANIC (Sect.
C
) allowed us to reconstruct coherent images for HR 4049 and PS Gem, where SQUEEZE failed as it heavily overfitted the data due to the sparser
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage. Otherwise, SQUEEZE recovers the same general features as our ORGANIC images, confirming the convergence of our ORGANIC workflow. Lastly, Appendix
F
assesses the robustness of the image features against the specifics of the
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage and dirty beam artefacts. In what follows, we will address the robustness of image features revealed by our tests when needed.
5
Results
Table 3
:
ORGANIC image reconstruction parameters and image-derived inner rim
parameters.
10
10
10
The secondary positions
(
Δ
​
α
sec
,
Δ
​
δ
sec
)
(\Delta\alpha_{\mathrm{sec}},\Delta\delta_{\mathrm{sec}})
are the same as in Table
2
(except IW Car, where
(
Δ
​
α
sec
,
Δ
​
δ
sec
)
=
(
1.12
,
−
1.90
)
​
mas
(\Delta\alpha_{\mathrm{sec}},\Delta\delta_{\mathrm{sec}})\!=\!(1.12,-1.90)\,\mathrm{mas}
following Fig.
2
).
$a$
$a$
footnotetext:
SF
\mathrm{SF}
,
PS
\mathrm{PS}
&
FOV
\mathrm{FOV}
are the image sampling factor (i.e. how many pixels fit in the beam size), pixel scale and field-of-view.
$b$
$b$
footnotetext:
HR 4049 and possibly PS Gem likely have overestimated
r
hl
r_{\mathrm{hl}}
values, since their images account for an over-resolved flux component (see Fig.
7
). Similarly,
r
hl
r_{\mathrm{hl}}
could be slightly underestimated for AI Sco, since the flux close to the primary is systematically offset southwards (see Sect.
5.3.1
).
$c$
$c$
footnotetext:
For IW Car, we find both inner flux arcs and a large outer flux arc (see Sect.
5.3.7
), and we provide fits for both.
Target
SF
a\,a
a\,a
footnotemark:
a
\,a
PS
\mathrm{PS}
a\,a
a\,a
footnotemark:
a
\,a
FOV
\mathrm{FOV}
a\,a
a\,a
footnotemark:
a
\,a
ℒ
data
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{data}}
ℒ
reg
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{reg}}
f
prim
,
0
f_{\mathrm{prim},0}
UD
prim
\mathrm{UD}_{\mathrm{prim}}
f
sec
,
0
f_{\mathrm{sec},0}
d
rim
d_{\mathrm{rim}}
θ
rim
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}
i
rim
i_{\mathrm{rim}}
PA
rim
\mathrm{PA}_{\mathrm{rim}}
Δ
​
α
rim
\Delta\alpha_{\mathrm{rim}}
Δ
​
δ
rim
\Delta\delta_{\mathrm{rim}}
r
hl
r_{\mathrm{hl}}
(
mas
)
\mathrm{(mas)}
(
mas
)
\mathrm{(mas)}
(
%
)
(\%)
(
mas
)
\mathrm{(mas)}
(
%
)
(\%)
(
mas
)
(\mathrm{mas})
(
∘
)
(^{\circ})
(
∘
)
(^{\circ})
(
mas
)
(\mathrm{mas})
(
mas
)
(\mathrm{mas})
(
mas
)
(\mathrm{mas})
AI Sco
b\,b
b\,b
footnotemark:
b
\,b
5
5
0.230
0.230
29.5
29.5
2.09
2.09
0.94
0.94
64.5
64.5
–
2.76
2.76
−
0.59
-0.59
4.8
−
0.5
+
0.8
4.8^{+0.8}_{-0.5}
46
−
14
+
10
46^{+10}_{-14}
135
−
7
+
7
135^{+7}_{-7}
0.51
−
0.15
+
0.13
0.51^{+0.13}_{-0.15}
−
1.4
−
0.2
+
0.3
-1.4^{+0.3}_{-0.2}
2.89
−
0.23
+
0.12
2.89^{+0.12}_{-0.23}
EN TrA
4
4
0.265
0.265
33.9
33.9
1.63
1.63
0.91
0.91
72.1
72.1
–
5.37
5.37
0.30
0.30
6.1
−
0.2
+
0.3
6.1^{+0.3}_{-0.2}
50
−
4
+
3
50^{+3}_{-4}
37
−
7
+
5
37^{+5}_{-7}
−
1.02
−
0.09
+
0.09
-1.02^{+0.09}_{-0.09}
−
0.89
−
0.21
+
0.17
-0.89^{+0.17}_{-0.21}
3.99
−
0.27
+
0.13
3.99^{+0.13}_{-0.27}
HD 95767
4
4
0.263
0.263
33.7
33.7
0.96
0.96
0.97
0.97
44.1
44.1
–
24.75
24.75
2.36
2.36
6.01
−
0.05
+
0.05
6.01^{+0.05}_{-0.05}
23.7
−
0.5
+
1.0
23.7_{-0.5}^{+1.0}
7
−
5
+
8
7_{-5}^{+8}
0.03
−
0.03
+
0.03
0.03_{-0.03}^{+0.03}
−
0.51
−
0.03
+
0.03
-0.51_{-0.03}^{+0.03}
3.43
−
0.13
+
0.13
3.43^{+0.13}_{-0.13}
HD 108015
3
3
0.327
0.327
41.9
41.9
0.99
0.99
0.93
0.93
56.0
56.0
–
–
1.45
1.45
6.28
−
0.06
+
0.06
6.28_{-0.06}^{+0.06}
30
−
3
+
3
30_{-3}^{+3}
81
−
5
+
5
81_{-5}^{+5}
−
0.57
−
0.04
+
0.04
-0.57_{-0.04}^{+0.04}
0.58
−
0.06
+
0.06
0.58_{-0.06}^{+0.06}
3.78
−
0.16
+
0.16
3.78^{+0.16}_{-0.16}
HR 4049
b\,b
b\,b
footnotemark:
b
\,b
2
2
0.635
0.635
81.3
81.3
0.97
0.97
0.92
0.92
65.4
65.4
0.72
0.72
0.24
0.24
2.39
2.39
17.2
−
1.2
+
1.5
17.2_{-1.2}^{+1.5}
48
−
4
+
4
48_{-4}^{+4}
95
−
8
+
8
95_{-8}^{+8}
−
1.5
−
0.8
+
0.6
-1.5_{-0.8}^{+0.6}
−
0.4
−
0.3
+
0.3
-0.4_{-0.3}^{+0.3}
16.5
−
1.9
+
3.6
16.5^{+3.6}_{-1.9}
IRAS 15469-5311
3
3
0.294
0.294
37.6
37.6
0.82
0.82
0.89
0.89
52.9
52.9
–
–
1.84
1.84
8.99
−
0.09
+
0.09
8.99_{-0.09}^{+0.09}
35
−
2
+
2
35_{-2}^{+2}
51
−
3
+
3
51_{-3}^{+3}
0.23
−
0.06
+
0.06
0.23_{-0.06}^{+0.06}
−
0.29
−
0.05
+
0.05
-0.29_{-0.05}^{+0.05}
5.3
−
0.2
+
0.3
5.3^{+0.3}_{-0.2}
IW Car
c\,c
c\,c
footnotemark:
c
\,c
3
3
0.350
0.350
44.8
44.8
1.52
1.52
0.95
0.95
63.6
63.6
0.50
0.50
1.99
1.99
0.89
0.89
6.9
−
0.5
+
0.5
6.9_{-0.5}^{+0.5}
48
−
5
+
5
48_{-5}^{+5}
144
−
7
+
8
144_{-7}^{+8}
0.15
−
0.18
+
0.19
0.15_{-0.18}^{+0.19}
−
0.1
−
0.2
+
0.2
-0.1_{-0.2}^{+0.2}
11.7
−
0.4
+
1.0
11.7^{+1.0}_{-0.4}
20.3
−
0.8
+
0.9
20.3_{-0.8}^{+0.9}
57
−
2
+
2
57_{-2}^{+2}
176
−
3
+
3
176_{-3}^{+3}
−
1.0
−
0.2
+
0.3
-1.0_{-0.2}^{+0.3}
−
1.4
−
0.4
+
0.4
-1.4_{-0.4}^{+0.4}
11.9
−
0.3
+
1.0
11.9^{+1.0}_{-0.3}
PS Gem
b\,b
b\,b
footnotemark:
b
\,b
3
3
0.311
0.311
39.8
39.8
0.71
0.71
0.88
0.88
87.0
87.0
0.37
0.37
–
0.61
0.61
9.0
−
0.3
+
0.4
9.0_{-0.3}^{+0.4}
28
−
3
+
5
28_{-3}^{+5}
161
−
12
+
7
161_{-12}^{+7}
0.027
−
0.15
+
0.15
0.027_{-0.15}^{+0.15}
−
0.4
−
0.2
+
0.2
-0.4_{-0.2}^{+0.2}
7.5
−
0.8
+
0.8
7.5^{+0.8}_{-0.8}
We applied the image reconstruction workflow developed in Sect.
4
to our eight targets (Sect.
2
), providing high
fidelity, non-parametric images of their circumstellar environment. The
parameters for our final ORGANIC images are summarised in Table
3
, while the reconstructed images themselves are shown
in Figs.
3
&
4
. The dusty inner disc rim is well-resolved for
all targets. We first present a fitting routine to extract the overall inner
rim properties and radial surface brightness profiles in Sect.
5.1
, and briefly describe the derived rim inclinations in the context of the ’RVb phenomenon’ (long-term secular brightness modulations following
P
orb
P_{\mathrm{orb}}
; see e.g.
Manick et al.
2017
) in Sect.
5.2
. We then describe the detected morphological features in Sect.
5.3
.
A comprehensive discussion of the possible underlying physical mechanisms is
presented in Sect.
6
.
Figure 3
:
Peak-normalised ORGANIC images for our first four targets (using the
image parameters in Table
3
). The SPARCO primary and
secondary (if detected) are denoted by a golden star and green cross,
respectively. The median inner rim fit and the position of its centre (see
Table.
3
) are denoted by a dash-dotted cyan
ellipse and a white dot, respectively.
3
3
,
4
4
and
5
​
σ
5\sigma
contours are
given as dotted, dashed and solid white lines. The interferometric beam size
and a
5
​
AU
5\,\mathrm{AU}
scale bar are shown in the bottom.
Figure 4
:
Analogous to Fig.
3
, but for our
last four targets. For IW Car, we show inner rim fits for both the inner and
outer flux arcs (see Sect.
5.3.7
). For the
sake of clarity, the rim fit centre is only given for the innermost rim fit.
For PS Gem, the strong flux smearing from the primary (see Sect.
5.3.8
)
has been masked out, as denoted by a grey circle, to better reveal the
circumstellar medium.
Figure 5
:
Example of the inner rim fitting procedure for IRAS 15469-5311. Blue errorbars denote the rim positions along different radial rays. Red ellipses show 100 random samples drawn from the rim’s MCMC chains, with the median ellipse (Table
3
) shown in dot-dashed blue. Lines drawn from the median rim centre (white dot) indicate the direction and error of the projected rim’s minor and major axes.
5.1
Rim fitting and brightness profile calculation
We developed an
ellipse fitting procedure to retrieve the inner rim parameters directly from
the images. Radial rays were drawn from the primary every
10
∘
10^{\mathrm{\circ}}
azimuthally, including only rim sections of higher per-pixel significance (
≥
3
​
σ
\geq\!3\sigma
for all targets except PS Gem, for which we use
≥
2
​
σ
\geq\!2\sigma
).
A Gaussian was matched to each ray’s radial profile to constrain the radial
position of peak brightness. This was repeated for every image in the ORGANIC cubes to determine the rim positions and their uncertainties, taken as the median and standard deviation across the cube. For AI Sco, we placed a
0.9
​
mas
0.9\,\mathrm{mas}
diameter circular mask over the primary during this procedure, since the image flux close to its position is likely biased slightly southwards (see Sect.
5.3.1
).
An ellipse was then fit to the positions in order to derive the rim parameters and their uncertainties. For this, we used the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) package emcee
11
11
11
https://github.com/dfm/emcee
(Foreman-Mackey et al.,
2013
)
with 32 walkers performing 100 000 steps each. An example of this procedure is shown in Fig.
5
.
The resulting inner rims are displayed on Figs.
3
&
4
, and their parameters summarised in Table
3
. We stress that the emission does not probe the mid-plane,
but originates from (sub-)
μ
​
m
\mathrm{\mu m}
grains lifted to layers around
1
−
2
1\!-\!2
gas scale heights higher up
(e.g. Hillen et al.,
2014
; Kluska et al.,
2018
)
.
On-sky projection can then skew the centre of emission (
Δ
​
α
rim
\Delta\alpha_{\mathrm{rim}}
,
Δ
​
δ
rim
\Delta\delta_{\mathrm{rim}}
) along the projected rim’s minor axis, away
from the centre of mass
(e.g. de Boer et al.,
2016
)
. We note that in case the inner rim is sharp and wall-like, the limited beam size of the observations causes the imaged morphology of the rim to be slightly washed out. This can cause our rim fitting method to induce a systematic positive bias of typically
≲
1
​
mas
\lesssim 1\,\mathrm{mas}
(
≲
2
​
mas
\lesssim 2\,\mathrm{mas}
for HR 4049 & PS Gem) in
θ
in
\theta_{\mathrm{in}}
and a negative bias of
≲
10
∘
\lesssim 10^{\mathrm{\circ}}
in
i
rim
i_{\mathrm{rim}}
relative to the true values (see Sect.
B.1
). However, at least for rims set by sublimation physics, there is little reason to suspect the rim would be sharp in the first place (see Sect.
6.1.1
).
Using concentric elliptical apertures following the rim orientations (Table
3
), we then calculated radial surface brightness
profiles. This was again repeated for every image in the image cubes to provide
1
​
σ
1\sigma
uncertainties. The resulting profiles are shown in Fig.
7
.
For IW Car, where we find both inner flux arcs and a large outer flux arc (see
Sect.
5.3.7
), the rim fitting procedure was
applied to both features. The IW Car brightness profile calculation was based
on the orientation of the rim fit to the inner arcs.
5.2
Apparent rim inclinations and the RVb phenomenon
Using PIONIER snapshots,
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
performed geometric model fitting of the inner rim and central binary for a large sample of 23 post-AGB circumbinary discs. They found that the apparent inclination of rims observable with PIONIER ranges between
i
rim
∼
10
−
65
∘
i_{\mathrm{rim}}\!\sim\!10-65^{\circ}
. A significant subset of post-AGB binaries also displays a long-term brightness modulation following the binary period known as the ’RVb phenomenon’. It is commonly thought to be induced by periodic obscuration along the binary orbit as the line-of-sight to the post-AGB primary grazes the inner rim, and is thus considered to be an indicator of high rim inclination
(e.g. Van Winckel et al.,
1999
; Manick et al.,
2017
)
. Nevertheless,
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
only found high apparent inclinations (
i
rim
≳
60
∘
i_{\mathrm{rim}}\gtrsim 60^{\circ}
) for three out of nine of their RVb targets, but the authors advised caution when considering their inclination values given the generally poor
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage.
The RVb phenomenon has also been firmly established in five out of eight of our targets: AI Sco, HD 95767, HR 4049, IW car & PS Gem (Table
1
). Using our images obtained under greatly superior
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage than the snapshots in
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
, we find moderate apparent inclinations for AI Sco, HR 4049 & IW Car (
45
∘
≲
i
rim
≲
60
∘
45^{\circ}\lesssim\!i_{\mathrm{rim}}\!\lesssim 60^{\circ}
; Table
3
). Moreover, we find low apparent inclinations for HD 95767 and PS Gem (
i
rim
≲
30
∘
i_{\mathrm{rim}}\lesssim 30^{\circ}
; Table
3
), though we note their RVb-related
V
V
band brightness semi-amplitudes are relatively weak at
Δ
​
V
≲
0.1
​
mag
\Delta V\lesssim 0.1\,\mathrm{mag}
(Kiss et al.,
2007
; Van Winckel et al.,
1999
)
. These results corroborate the findings of
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
, showing that the RVb phenomenon can indeed still occur in the presence of moderate-to-low inclination disc rims. This implies very high disc scale heights in case the conventional disc obscuration hypothesis holds true, and that the exact link between disc rim inclination and the presence of the RVb phenomenon is not yet clear.
5.3
Detected features
Below, we describe the detected morphological features
in our images, and, when possible, note on connections with features detected
in previous studies on the same systems. Especially pertinent in this respect again are the PIONIER snapshot geometric fitting results of
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
. Since this included all our targets, this enables comparison across a
multi-year timebase. We note that this comparison should nevertheless be approached
cautiously, as
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
used sparse
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverages and relatively
simplistic inner rim models up to only second order in azimuthal modulation. Potential reconstruction artefacts revealed by our tests in Appendices
B
,
D
&
F
are addressed on a case-by-case basis.
5.3.1
AI Sco
Simple RT inclination effects on a smooth, circular rim, centred on a single star, dictate that the NIR emission originates from the far side of the rim relative to the observer. The near side is namely obscured due to self-shadowing, resulting in emission that is antisymmetric relative to the projected rim’s major axis and symmetric relative to the minor one
(e.g. Hofmann et al.,
2022
)
. While the north-eastern side of AI Sco’s rim is generally brighter than the south-western – likely marking the former as the far side – there is also a strong brightness enhancement towards the primary’s position and the rim’s major axis (Fig.
3
). The flux in the immediate vicinity of the primary is also slightly offset southward (by about
∼
1
​
mas
\!\sim\!1\,\mathrm{mas}
) from where it’s expected to be according to the rim fit. As shown in Appendix
B
, this is a bias likely induced by the lack of long baseline observations towards the north and north-east (Fig.
1
) in combination with the close approach of the primary to the rim. Nevertheless, this morphology cannot be accounted for solely with inclination effects.
The brightness enhancement next to the primary dominates and heavily biases our
geometric model towards it ,which fails to fully reproduce the fainter ’tail’ of emission towards the south-east, resulting in a poor goodness-of-fit at
χ
ν
2
∼
5
\chi^{2}_{\nu}\!\sim\!5
(Fig.
8
& Table
2
). We generally caution that in cases like AI Sco, where the azimuthal brightness profile has sharp features, our simple geometric models with only one order of azimuthal modulation can fail to capture the full complexity and present faulty rim orientations (compare AI Sco’s values in Tables
2
&
3
).
Nevertheless, the
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
model for AI Sco (data taken
∼
5
​
yr
\sim\!5\,\mathrm{yr}
before ours) similarly found a strong brightness enhancement in the direction
of the primary (see the model images in their Fig. C.1). This suggests that the
bright enhancement could be long-lived, lasting at least several years, and following
the primary.
5.3.2
EN TrA
While the inner rim is significantly
brighter along the north-western side compared to the south-eastern –
suggesting the former represents the far side of the inclined rim – the image cannot
be fully explained by just inclination effects (Fig.
3
).
The rim has a brightness enhancement shifted towards its major axis.
This enhancement aligns with the direction of the primary, with both tending towards
the north-east side of the rim. The
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
geometric model fit (data
taken
∼
7
​
yr
\sim\!7\,\mathrm{yr}
before ours) found a brightness enhancement almost
symmetric along the north-western side. While this positioning was compatible
with disc inclination effects, it also aligned with the direction
of the primary at that time. As for AI Sco, the brightness enhancement in our image could last
for multiple years and follow the primary.
5.3.3
HD 95767
The inner rim shows a strong brightness
enhancement to the north-east, shifted towards its major axis. It could tentatively be aligned
with the direction of the primary. The geometric model of
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
(data
taken
∼
7.5
​
yr
\sim\!7.5\,\mathrm{yr}
before ours) found the disc to be brightest in the
south-east, aligned in the direction of the primary. While suggestive, this should be approached with caution. As shown in Appendix
F
, the brightness enhancement is highly sensitive to the
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage, likely due the combination of a small over- or under-subtraction of the SPARCO secondary together with a particularly high secondary flux fraction (
f
sec
,
0
∼
25
%
f_{\mathrm{sec,0}}\!\sim\!25\%
, Table
3
). Similarly, the small amount of lower
per-pixel significance emission in the inner rim cavity is highly likely to be a dirty beam artefact related to the specifics of the
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage (see Sect.
F.2
).
The inner rim emission seems to faintly bulge towards the north and south, with the former curving into an
arch-like shape. Although this feature is intriguing, we similarly urge caution in its
interpretation, given the high sensitivity of the brightness enhancement and the fact that the dirty beam exhibits a negative flux arch at a comparable
location (Fig.
15
). Due to these complications, we exclude HD 95767 from our discussion on potential substructure formation mechanisms further on in Sect.
6.2
.
5.3.4
HD 108015
The inner rim is generally brighter
along the northern side compared to the southern, suggesting that the
former represents the far side of the inclined rim. There is a strong
brightness enhancement shifted towards the major axis in the north-east (though there is some uncertainty up to
∼
10
∘
\sim\!10^{\circ}
in its position angle; see Appendix
D
). The primary
motion in HD 108015 is not expected to be resolved much at all. Using the
spectroscopic value of the primary’s projected semi-major axis,
a
1
​
sin
⁡
i
bin
a_{1}\sin{i_{\mathrm{bin}}}
(Table
2
) and assuming co-planarity between the binary (i.e.
i
bin
=
i
rim
i_{\mathrm{bin}}\!=\!i_{\mathrm{rim}}
; Table
3
) – a
reasonable assumption given that the disc is thought to form from the binary –
we estimate
a
1
∼
0.1
​
mas
a_{1}\!\sim\!0.1\,\mathrm{mas}
. Hence, the offset between the projected
rim centre and primary position is in this case mostly a projection effect due
to the fact that the
H
H
band continuum is emitted from higher-up regions in the
disc (Sect.
5.1
). The small amount of flux interior of the cavity towards the south-east is likely an artefact related to the
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage (see Appendix
F
).
It is thus not clear towards which direction of the disc rim the primary is
offset.
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
(data taken
∼
7.5
​
yr
\sim\!7.5\,\mathrm{yr}
before ours)
instead found a strong brightness enhancement in the south-western sector of
the inner rim, approximately opposite of the enhancement we find. If this
feature were to be following the primary, given the binary period of
906
±
6
​
d
906\pm 6\,\mathrm{d}
and the fact that the orbit is circular
(Oomen et al.,
2018
)
, we would
have expected it to have moved by only
33
±
7
∘
33\pm 7\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
(calculated
between the mean MJD of each observing epoch). Hence, this indicates that the enhancement
found in our image is likely moving at its own angular speed, independent of
the binary orbit.
5.3.5
HR 4049
The rim is generally brighter along the
northern side relative to the southern, marking the former as its far
side. A strong brightness enhancement is seen along the eastern side of the
rim’s major axis, aligned with the position of the primary. The imaged rim has a
slightly choppy appearance, likely caused by the sparser
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage along
the larger baselines (Fig.
1
). While the western brightness
enhancement seems aligned with the primary position, the geometric model by
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
(data taken
∼
5
​
yr
\sim\!5\,\mathrm{yr}
before ours) instead shows
the main brightness enhancement to also be oriented towards the west, while
the primary was oriented east towards a secondary brightness enhancement. As for HD 108015, this tentatively suggests the
main brightness enhancement could be long-lived and moving at its own pace, though
we do not exclude the possibility that the brightness enhancement is following
the primary instead.
5.3.6
IRAS 15469-53110
The rim is brighter along the
south-eastern side, marking it as the far side of the inner rim. Furthermore,
the rim is highly anti-symmetric along its projected major axis, and simultaneously symmetric
along the minor axis. This indicates that the rim morphology, at least at the resolution
probed by our observations, is consistent with that of a smooth, inclined circular
rim with a centred star, without any other substructure or perturbation.
5.3.7
IW Car
IW Car’s inner disc regions display a
highly complex morphology. While a broad outer flux arc is seen to the west,
smaller flux arcs are seen closer to the inner binary. These are generally of slightly
lower per-pixel significance (
≤
3
​
σ
\leq 3\sigma
), yet represent a significant
fraction of the total image flux at
12.4
±
1.6
%
12.4\pm 1.6\,\%
(
∼
4.3
±
0.5
%
\sim\!4.3\pm 0.5\,\%
of the total flux in
H
H
). We note that the exact details of the inner arcs’ azimuthal profile are not fully well-constrained (see Appendix
D
).
It is not a priori clear whether the outer arc or inner arcs, or perhaps both,
represent a bona fide rim structure. As a result, we have applied our rim fitting
procedure (Sect.
5.1
)
to each separately. If both do represent rims, their orientation is likely misaligned, with
a difference in inclination and position angle of
∼
8
±
5
∘
\sim\!8\pm 5\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
and
33
±
8
∘
33\pm 8\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
(
i
=
48.5
±
5
∘
i=48.5\pm 5\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
&
PA
=
144
−
7
+
8
∘
\mathrm{PA}=144_{-7}^{+8}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
for the inner arcs and
i
=
57
±
2
∘
i=57\pm 2\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
&
PA
=
176
±
3
∘
\mathrm{PA}=176\pm 3\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
for the outer arc; Table
3
). Both these orientations are
relatively consistent with the orientation of the outer disc found by
Andrych et al. (
2023
)
(Fig.
6
), using SPHERE/IRDIS
H
H
band polarimetric scattered light imaging (
i
=
41.7
−
7.7
+
6.5
∘
i=41.7^{+6.5}_{-7.7}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
&
PA
=
161
−
10
+
12
∘
\mathrm{PA}=161^{+12}_{-10}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
;
taken
∼
1
​
yr
\sim\!1\,\mathrm{yr}
before our data). This comparison is however complicated by the fact that the outer disc orientation could be
biased by artefacts induced during the SPHERE data reduction. Specifically, the
inner ’holes’ due to subtraction of the unresolved polarised flux
(Andrych et al.,
2023
)
. It is not clear which of the features seen with PIONIER traces the actual inner rim of the outer disc seen by SPHERE.
The geometric fit by
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
(data
taken
∼
5
​
yr
\sim\!5\,\mathrm{yr}
before ours) recovered the outer flux arc, though
it could not capture the inner arcs and the full complexity of the inner
disc (as shown by their poorer goodness-of-fit at
χ
ν
2
=
3.9
\chi^{2}_{\nu}\!=\!3.9
).
Figure 6
:
SPHERE-PIONIER comparison for IW Car.
Left:
SPHERE/IRDIS image
(polarised
Q
ϕ
Q_{\phi}
intensity, adapted from Andrych et al.,
2023
)
, probing
H
H
band starlight scattered on the outer disc. The image is presented on an
arcsinh
\mathrm{arcsinh}
scale to highlight faint features. The central dark hole is a data reduction artefact due to over-subtraction of the central unresolved polarised flux
(Andrych et al.,
2023
)
. We mark the midplane’s shadow and the position of the primary. The partial arc to the east likely traces light scattered from the side of the disc facing away from the observer
(Andrych et al.,
2023
)
.
Right:
zoomed inset with our ORGANIC PIONIER image, probing
H
H
band thermal emission in the inner disc regions. The position of the secondary is marked by a green cross.
5.3.8
PS Gem
PS Gem’s image reconstruction shows a very
strong flux smearing from the primary (masked in Fig.
4
),
with a contribution of
∼
15
±
3
%
\sim\!15\pm 3\,\%
to the image flux (
∼
1.9
±
0.3
%
\sim\!1.9\pm 0.3\,\%
of the total
H
H
band flux). This is likely due to the primary’s orbital
movement over the timespan of the observations (
Δ
​
t
obs
/
P
orb
=
8.7
%
\Delta t_{\mathrm{obs}}/P_{\mathrm{orb}}\!=\!8.7\,\%
; Table
1
), causing it
to be better represented as a slightly smeared Gaussian instead of a uniform
disc. Its effect is exacerbated by the low flux contribution of the disc at
∼
13
%
\sim\!13\,\%
(causing only weak non-zero closure phase signal; Fig.
14
)
and the strong dirty beam secondary lobes caused by the sparser
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage
(Figs.
1
&
15
). This causes the retrieved
inner rim azimuthal morphology to be very choppy and mostly of low per-pixel significance
(
≤
3
​
σ
\leq 3\sigma
), though the radial intensity profile is still well-constrained
(Fig.
7
). While we tentatively discern a
bright spot in the west and a broader brightness enhancement in the south of
the rim (the latter also being retrieved by our geometric model; Fig.
8
),
we forgo including them in our discussion on the origins of potential substructures
in Sect.
6.2
due to these complications.
Overall, five out of eight systems show robust, non-axisymmetric brightness features
inconsistent with solely inclination effects, indicating that inner rims of
post-AGB circumbinary discs are often perturbed.
6
Discussion
In this section, we first examine the mechanisms that determine
the inner rim position (Sect.
6.1
). We then
turn to the possible origins of the robustly detected substructure candidates,
drawing heavily on the extensive literature available for protoplanetary discs
(Sect.
6.2
).
6.1
Mechanism behind the inner rim position
We investigate our detected inner rims in the context of two possible mechanisms setting the rim position: dust sublimation and binary
truncation.
6.1.1
Dust sublimation
All our targets exhibit SEDs
representative of ’full’ discs
(Kluska et al.,
2022
)
, suggesting their energetics
are consistent with an inner rim near the dust sublimation radius. To validate
this scenario, we confront the derived inner rim radii (
θ
rim
/
2
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}/2
; Table
3
) with the expected dust sublimation radius
(e.g. Lazareff et al.,
2017
)
:
R
sub
=
1
2
​
(
C
bw
ϵ
)
1
/
2
​
(
L
∗
4
​
π
​
σ
SB
​
T
sub
4
)
1
/
2
,
R_{\mathrm{sub}}=\frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{C_{\mathrm{bw}}}{\epsilon}\right)^{1/2}\left(\frac{L_{*}}{4\pi\sigma_{\mathrm{SB}}T_{\mathrm{sub}}^{4}}\right)^{1/2},
(9)
with
C
bw
C_{\mathrm{bw}}
the backwarming coefficient,
ϵ
\epsilon
the grain
cooling efficiency,
L
∗
L_{*}
the primary’s luminosity (Table
1
),
σ
SB
\sigma_{\mathrm{SB}}
the Stefan-Boltzmann
constant and
T
sub
T_{\mathrm{sub}}
the sublimation temperature. Since
R
sub
R_{\mathrm{sub}}
and
L
∗
1
/
2
L_{*}^{1/2}
are proportional to the target distance, the angular size of
R
sub
R_{\mathrm{sub}}
is robust against any errors on the parallax. This includes
those induced by the binary motion, as our targets were not marked as
astrometric binaries in Gaia DR3.
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
found a typical inner rim temperature of
∼
1100
−
1400
​
K
\sim\!1100\!-\!1400\,\mathrm{K}
. Meanwhile,
Corporaal et al. (
2023b
)
similarly
found a rim temperature of
∼
1250
​
K
\sim\!1250\,\mathrm{K}
for the prototypical full
disc IRAS 08544-4431 through RT modelling. Given these values, we assume a conservative
range of
T
sub
=
1000
−
1500
​
K
T_{\mathrm{sub}}\!=\!1000\!-\!1500\,\mathrm{K}
. The cooling
efficiency reaches its highest value,
ϵ
=
1
\epsilon=1
, for large grains (
a
grain
≳
λ
NIR
/
(
2
​
π
)
a_{\mathrm{grain}}\!\gtrsim\!\lambda_{\mathrm{NIR}}/(2\pi)
;
Lazareff et al.
2017
). Given that
grain growth in post-AGB discs is known to easily proceed up to
μ
​
m
\mu m
sizes and
beyond
(e.g. Gielen et al.,
2008
; Scicluna et al.,
2020
; Bujarrabal et al.,
2023
)
, and the fact that
large grains significantly help cool smaller grains even at moderate abundances
(Kama et al.,
2009
)
, we assume
ϵ
≈
1
\epsilon\!\approx\!1
. The backwarming
coefficient can take on values of
C
bw
=
1
−
4
C_{\mathrm{bw}}\!=\!1\!-\!4
. The lower limit
corresponds to optically thin dust destruction, while the upper corresponds to
an instantaneously optically thick, wall-like rim
(Kama et al.,
2009
)
.
We show the expected range of dust sublimation radii for
C
bw
=
1
C_{\mathrm{bw}}\!=\!1
(also accounting for the
1
​
σ
1\sigma
uncertainties on
L
∗
L_{*}
)
in Fig.
7
. Disregarding IW Car, where it is
not clear whether the innermost circumstellar flux actually traces the inner rim
(see Sect.
6.2.4
), the image-derived rim
radii lie at or just beyond (
∼
1
​
–
​
2
​
mas
\sim\!1\text{--}2\,\mathrm{mas}
) the outer edge
of the expected
C
bw
=
1
C_{\mathrm{bw}}=1
sublimation radii. However, varying the backwarming up to
C
bw
=
4
C_{\mathrm{bw}}\!=\!4
can raise the
R
sub
R_{\mathrm{sub}}
estimates by factors of up to two, which can readily provide an
excellent match to every target. We conclude that the inner rim positions are compatible with dust
sublimation, though most rims are likely not fully optically thin. We also
stress that sublimation rims are not well-defined at a single radius.
Simulations of PPD sublimation fronts
(e.g. Kama et al.,
2009
; Flock et al.,
2016
,
2017
)
instead often display broad, wedge-shaped geometries (extending from
C
bw
=
1
C_{\mathrm{bw}}\!=\!1
to
C
bw
≈
4
C_{\mathrm{bw}}\!\approx\!4
). Unfortunately, the sharpness of
the rim is hard to discern from imaging alone, and RT modelling of the SEDs
and interferometry
(cf. Hillen et al.,
2014
; Kluska et al.,
2018
)
would be needed to
constrain it.
Figure 7
:
Peak-normalised ORGANIC radial surface brightness profiles. The profiles
and their
1
​
σ
1\sigma
contours are given in black, with red bars denoting the
azimuthally averaged beam size. An orange strip represents the range of sublimation
radii for
C
bw
=
1
C_{\mathrm{bw}}=1
(Sect.
6.1.1
).
The image-derived inner rim radius (
θ
rim
/
2
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}/2
; Table
3
)
is given as dot-dashed blue line, and for targets where RV monitoring is available (Table
1
), a
dashed purple line provides an upper limit to the binary truncation radius
R
trunc
R_{\mathrm{trunc}}
(Sect.
6.1.2
). Shaded regions indicate
1
​
σ
1\sigma
errors for both.
For IW Car, we display inner rim radii for both the inner and outer flux
arcs (see Sect.
5.3.7
), with the brightness
profile calculation based on the orientation of the inner arcs. For PS Gem,
a mask was placed in front of the primary to mitigate the effects of strong
flux smearing (Sect.
5.3.8
), as denoted by a hatched strip.
6.1.2
Dynamical truncation by the binary
Alternatively, the location of the inner rim
could be set by binary truncation, where resonance torques and non-resonant
interactions can carve a cavity in the disc
(e.g. Artymowicz & Lubow,
1994
; Ragusa et al.,
2020
)
.
Detailed 3D hydrodynamical simulations of circumbinary discs show that binaries
can carve cavities with truncation radii of
R
trunc
≲
5
​
a
R_{\mathrm{trunc}}\lesssim 5a
,
with
a
a
the total binary semi-major axis
(though the value decreases with
decreasing binary mass ratio and orbital eccentricity, and increasing rim scale
height; Hirsh et al.,
2020
)
. While we lack full orbital solutions for our targets, we
can still set a conservative upper limit on the truncation radius when RV monitoring
is available. We do not attempt to use the
detected secondary positions, since single astrometric points do not provide strong
enough constraints on the orbital parameters, and dedicated astrometric
modelling would be required for this purpose
(e.g. Anugu et al.,
2023
)
.
First, the spectroscopic mass function of the secondary,
f
​
(
m
)
f(m)
, can be rewritten as follows:
f
​
(
m
)
=
M
sec
3
(
M
prim
+
M
sec
)
2
​
sin
3
⁡
i
bin
=
M
prim
a
2
​
(
a
−
a
1
)
​
(
a
1
​
sin
⁡
i
bin
)
3
.
f(m)=\frac{M_{\mathrm{sec}}^{3}}{(M_{\mathrm{prim}}+M_{\mathrm{sec}})^{2}}\sin^{3}i_{\mathrm{bin}}=\frac{M_{\mathrm{prim}}}{a^{2}(a-a_{1})}(a_{1}\sin i_{\mathrm{bin}})^{3}.
(10)
As we did for HD 108015 in Sect.
5.3.4
, we assume
co-planarity between the disc rim and the binary (i.e.
i
bin
=
i
rim
i_{\mathrm{bin}}\!=\!i_{\mathrm{rim}}
;
Table
3
). Following
Oomen et al.
2018
, we assume the post-AGB primary to follow the mass distribution of single white dwarfs in the Galactic field. Specifically, we adopt the value of
M
prim
=
0.62
±
0.11
​
M
⊙
M_{\mathrm{prim}}=0.62\pm 0.11\,\mathrm{M_{\odot}}
from
Tremblay et al.
2016
. If the values of
a
1
​
sin
⁡
i
bin
a_{1}\sin{i_{\mathrm{bin}}}
and
f
​
(
m
)
f(m)
are available from RV monitoring (Table
1
), Eq.
10
can readily be solved for the total semi-major axis
a
a
. The upper limit for the binary truncation radius inferred from this (
R
trunc
≲
5
​
a
R_{\mathrm{trunc}}\lesssim 5a
) is displayed for our targets with previous RV monitoring on Fig.
7
.
We find that the inner rims of HD 108015, HR 4049
and IRAS 15469-5311 are highly unlikely to be set through tidal
truncation, and are mostly unaffected by torque from the binary. Without
tighter constraints on the binary orbital properties and rim scale height, we cannot
make such assumptions for the other targets, and the inner rim might be set either by
binary truncation or by sublimation physics.
6.2
Origins of the detected potential substructures
We identified several robust brightness
asymmetries from our images in Sect.
5.3
. Most
strikingly, we found a number of brightness enhancements along the inner rim,
not symmetric with the rim minor axis and inconsistent with inclination
effects. For IW Car, the image reconstruction revealed an even more puzzling
morphology, finding inner flux arcs seemingly misaligned with a large, outer
flux arc to the west. We will now address several physical mechanisms that could
lie at the origin of these features, as well as possible ways to discern them. We stress that while we are sensitive to thermal emission from small
grains well-coupled to the gas, the emission can be optically thick
(e.g. Hillen et al.,
2014
; Kluska et al.,
2019
; Corporaal et al.,
2023b
)
.
As a result, relating the brightness contrasts of features seen in the
images (Figs.
3
&
4
) to gas density enhancements predicted by mechanisms mentioned below is outside the scope of this work.
6.2.1
Thermal response to the primary’s orbit
Comparing with the geometric PIONIER
snapshot modelling study of
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
, we found that the azimuthal brightness enhancement in AI Sco, EN TrA & HR 4049 (Sects.
5.3.1
,
5.3.2
&
5.3.3
) might be long-lived and following the
movement of the primary star. We propose that the irradiation of the primary
can preferentially heat parts of the disc rim it is closest to, locally increasing
the temperature, scale height and brightness. Indeed, a similar mechanism was
previously invoked to explain the MIR variability of the circumbinary PPD CoKu TAU/4,
showing that the thermal response of the inner rim is almost instant relative to
the binary motion for typical density and temperature values
(Nagel et al.,
2010
)
.
This was also cautiously considered by
Kluska et al. (
2018
)
as an explanation for the rim brightness enhancement in the post-AGB disc IRAS 08544-4431.
If this mechanism is indeed active for post-AGB circumbinary discs, these
brightness enhancements should follow the primary’s position along its orbit. While
comparison of our images with the modelling results of
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
is
strongly suggestive of this, the complexity of the retrieved morphologies necessitates
multi-epoch imaging to fully confirm this scenario.
6.2.2
Dynamical interaction with the binary
Ragusa et al. (
2020
)
performed comprehensive
3D hydrodynamical simulations for co-planar binary-truncated discs, showing
that the inner rim becomes eccentric – even for circular binaries – at mass
ratios
q
≥
0.05
q\geq 0.05
. This criterion is easily fulfilled by our targets
(Oomen et al.,
2018
)
.
The simulations show two simultaneously occurring types of substructure. First,
a long-lived crescent-like gas density enhancement at the eccentric rim,
caused by a ’traffic jam’, as the orbits of the gas are squeezed due to gradients
in disc eccentricity
(Ataiee et al.,
2013
)
. Second, a co-moving overdensity
for mass ratios
q
≳
0.2
q\gtrsim 0.2
, possibly formed by gas streams launched across the
cavity
(e.g. Shi et al.,
2012
; Ragusa et al.,
2017
; Calcino et al.,
2019
)
. Under our currently limited
constraints on the central binary orbit and disc rim scale height, these
substructure formation mechanisms could potentially be active in all our
targets except HD 108015, HR 4049 and IRAS 15469-5311 (where the rim is
unlikely to be affected by binary torque; Sect.
6.1.2
).
AI Sco is a particularly enticing candidate for these mechanisms, since the binary stars closely approach the rim, and the apparent rim centre is heavily displaced in the direction of the projected major axis relative to the binary, potentially indicating an eccentric disc cavity (Fig.
3
).
These binary-induced substructures are readily discernable from both each other and a thermal response to the primary through their expected motion.
Features caused by thermal response should orbit on a timescale of
P
orb
P_{\mathrm{orb}}
(Table
1
), while the binary-induced
traffic jam and co-moving overdensity are, respectively, precessing on a
timescale of
∼
100
−
1000
​
P
orb
\sim\!100-\!1000\,P_{\mathrm{orb}}
and orbiting with the local Keplerian velocity
(Ragusa et al.,
2020
)
. This clear
separation in expected motion provides a powerful way of discriminating between
thermal and dynamical origins.
6.2.3
Hydrodynamical instability
Another possible mechanism causing
asymmetric structure in inner disc rims is hydrodynamical instability. Specifically,
the Rossby wave instability
(RWI; e.g. Lovelace et al.,
1999
; Meheut et al.,
2013
; Bae et al.,
2023
)
.
RWI occurs when there is a local maximum in the vortensity of the disc,
typically induced by an initial bump in the gas pressure. If local viscosity is
low, the disc can form a single, long-lived vortex, orbiting at approximately
the local Keplerian velocity
(Lyra & Mac Low,
2012
; Meheut et al.,
2012
)
. While there are
currently no constraints on the vortensity or viscosity in our target discs –
there being only a single constraint on viscosity via RT modelling of the full
post-AGB disc IRAS 08544-4431
(Kluska et al.,
2018
; Corporaal et al.,
2023b
)
– RWI provides
a physically motivated framework for producing long-lived azimuthal asymmetries
at the rim moving at timescales different from the binary. The brightness
enhancements we find for HD 108015 and HR 4049 are possibly moving separately
from the primary (Sects.
5.3.4
&
5.3.5
), and are likely unaffected by binary
torque (Sect.
6.1.2
). This makes them consistent
with a possible vortex scenario.
Several ways of inducing such initial pressure bumps are considered for PPDs. One
such scenario is the carving of gaps and cavities by massive planets
(e.g. Pinilla et al.,
2012
)
.
Nevertheless, despite their status as potential second-generation planet formation sites
(Kluska et al.,
2022
)
, no candidate planet detections in post-AGB discs have been made so far. A scenario that does not invoke the presence of planets are turbulent ’dead zones’.
A dead zone pressure bump occurs in discs where accretion is mediated by the
magnetorotational instability
(MRI; Balbus & Hawley,
1998
)
, as gas transitions
from ionised to non-ionised and MRI turbulence becomes quiescent
(e.g. Flock et al.,
2016
,
2019
)
.
Previous work on PPDs showed that thermal ionisation alone is sufficient to produce strong ionisation transitions around
∼
1000
​
K
\sim\!1000\,\mathrm{K}
(e.g. Desch & Turner,
2015
; Jankovic et al.,
2021
)
, positioning the resulting pressure bump and RWI vortex close to the silicate sublimation rim
(e.g. Flock et al.,
2017
)
.
If RWI operates in the inner rim, the bright region should orbit at the local Keplerian velocity. It would be readily discernable with multi-epoch imaging from the other formation mechanisms considered here, except the binary-induced co-moving overdensities. Both types of feature namely move at similar angular speeds, and resolving their subtle kinematic differences (a lack of vorticity in the binary-induced overdensities) is beyond the capabilities of current facilities.
6.2.4
IW Car: a morphological puzzle
The inner disc of IW Car shows
a highly complex morphology (Sect.
5.3.7
). A large
flux arc is seen to the west, with additional smaller inner flux arcs found
closer to the binary (Fig.
4
).
The large western flux arc might trace the inner rim of the outer disc probed by SPHERE (Fig.
6
). The inner arcs could then probe accretion streams from the western rim onto the binary, with the emission originating from either hot, optically thick gas
(e.g. Kraus et al.,
2008
)
, or specific refractory dust grains which can survive at higher temperatures inward of the main rim
(e.g. corundum or iron; Kama et al.,
2009
)
. Alternatively, if both the western arc and the inner arcs represent rim-like structures, the two are likely misaligned relative to each other (Sect.
5.3.7
& Table
3
). This could be accounted for by a warped innermost disc
(Facchini et al.,
2013
)
, which was recently put forward to explain morphological differences between visual and NIR images of the outer disc of the post-AGB binary IRAS 08544-4431
(Andrych et al.,
2024
)
. Such warps can be induced by initial inclination misalignments between the binary orbit and the disc
(e.g. Young et al.,
2023
)
, or by the presence of an embedded giant planet on an inclined orbit
(Nealon et al.,
2018
)
.
In case the
inner arcs trace the actual inner rim of the outer disc observed with SPHERE (Fig.
6
), the
large western arc possibly traces a loosely wound spiral-like feature. This
can explain why the western flux arc seemingly attaches to the inner flux arcs
north-west of the primary (Fig.
4
). Spiral arms
can be induced in the disc by the presence of an embedded giant planet,
which should co-move with the orbit of their perturber
(e.g. Dong et al.,
2015
; Ren et al.,
2020
)
.
They may also be induced in an outflow lofted above the disc, similar to the putative
secondary condensation front previously found for the full post-AGB disc HD 101584
(Kluska et al.,
2020b
)
. Gravitational interaction with the binary is also a possibility,
though the resulting spirals are typically more flocculent and highly wound
(e.g. Price et al.,
2018
)
.
Additional imaging epochs are needed to disentangle these interpretations.
Such observations could confirm if the inner arcs are transient
accretion streams or represent a stable rim structure, and whether the western
flux arc is static and indicative of a rim structure, or moving and indicative of a
dynamical spiral.
7
Summary and conclusions
This study aimed to reveal the morphological complexity
of the inner regions in a varied sample of post-AGB circumbinary discs by spatially
resolving them. To this end, we have successfully introduced a consistent image
reconstruction workflow, combining the SPARCO approach with the ORGANIC
reconstruction and BADS optimisation algorithms. We applied this workflow to VLTI/PIONIER
observations of eight diverse full disc targets, obtained under the INSPIRING
ESO large programme, providing the first homogeneous, high fidelity imaging
survey of the inner disc regions.
Our images clearly resolve the inner disc regions for all targets. The dusty inner
rim sizes are generally compatible with dust sublimation, under the condition
that the rims are not always fully optically thin. The possibility that
the rim is set by binary tidal truncation instead cannot be excluded except for three targets – HD 108015, HR 4049 & IRAS 15469-5311. Further constraints on the binary properties (e.g. combining
RV monitoring with relative interferometric astrometry), ideally in addition with
constraints on the inner rim height from RT modelling, would clarify whether
discs could be binary-truncated on a system-by-system basis.
The images reveal a high degree of morphological complexity, displaying asymmetric azimuthal brightness enhancements that are significantly shifted way from the minor projected rim axis. After extensive testing of the image robustness, we demonstrate that the overall structure and orientation of these brightness enhancements is reliable in four targets – though finer details of the azimuthal profile, such as small-scale clumpiness, can be affected by artefacts and specifics of the imaging routine (Appendices
B
&
D
).
These enhancements are inconsistent with brightness asymmetry induced by simple RT effects
of an inclined, smooth circular rim surrounding a single star. Only one target’s
image – IRAS 15469-5311 – can be fully accounted for by invoking just inclination effects. Comparison
with the results of the PIONIER snapshot geometric modelling study by
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
,
providing a multi-year timebase with respect to our observations, tentatively
suggests these brightness enhancements could be long-lived and moving. They likely
either follow the position of the primary star or move at an angular speed independent
of the binary. Nevertheless, given the poor
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage in the
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
study,
follow-up imaging is needed to fully confirm these scenarios. One target – IW Car
– shows a large outer flux arc to the west, as well as smaller inner flux arcs
close to the central binary.
Drawing on the extensive literature available for PPDs, various substructure
formation mechanisms able to explain these features are considered. A thermal response
of the inner rim to the variable irradiation of the primary as it orbits provides
a natural explanation for brightness enhancements following the primary. In
cases where the inner rim is set by binary truncation, slowly precessing,
crescent-like features as well as co-moving overdensities can be produced. Co-moving
vortices induced by RWI also form a strong contender for features moving independent
of the binary. These could occur at gaps and cavities carved by massive
planets or at magnetic dead zones close to the sublimation radius. Given the different
expected rates of angular movement for these mechanisms, time-series imaging
would provide a strong means of both fully establishing their presence and
discerning amongst them. Only RWI vortices and binary-induced overdensities would
be hard to disentangle, since both substructures co-move at the local
Keplerian velocity. For IW Car the inner flux arcs could represent either accretion streams onto the central stars or a slightly warped innermost disc, with the large western arc denoting the disc rim. Alternatively, the
inner arcs might probe the main disc rim, and the western arc
a spiral-like feature located in the disc or in an outflow. The extent to which these features can affect the general disc structure and
spatial distribution of gas and dust – like the ubiquitous refractory depletion, potentially suspected to be induced by dust trapping substructures
(e.g. Oomen et al.,
2019
; Kluska et al.,
2022
; Mohorian et al.,
2024
)
– remains to be explored.
Future time-resolved and multi-wavelength imaging
campaigns, including MIR observations with VLTI/MATISSE and (sub)-mm observations
with ALMA, will allow us to probe more radially extended and vertically deeper
disc regions, as well as produce the first inner rim images for transition disc
targets. This will provide the temporal and spectral leverage needed to fully
unveil the dynamics of these complex environments. Dedicated modelling of substructure
formation scenarios would then be called for in order to fully uncover their implications
with regards to refractory depletion, possible second-generation planet
formation or changes to the orbital architecture of any surviving first-generation
planets.
Data availability
Observation logs for the selected VLTI/PIONIER observations are publicly available on Zenodo:
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20155601
.
Acknowledgements.
TDP acknowledges support of the Research Foundation - Flanders (FWO) under grant
11P6I24N. DK, HVW, and KA acknowledge the support of the Australian Research Council through Discovery Project DP240101150. JA and VB acknowledge the financial support of the project
CRISPNESS, grant PID2023-146056NB-C21, funded by by MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033
and by ERDF/EU. SK acknowledges support from an ERC Consolidator Grant (Grant
Agreement ID 101003096) and STFC Small Award (ST/Y002695/1). This research
has made use of the SIMBAD database, operated at CDS, Strasbourg, France.
This work was performed on the OzSTAR national facility at Swinburne
University of Technology. The OzSTAR program receives funding in part from the
Astronomy National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy (NCRIS) allocation
provided by the Australian Government, and from the Victorian Higher
Education State Investment Fund (VHESIF) provided by the Victorian
Government. This research has made use of the Jean-Marie Mariotti Center OiDB
service. This research has made use of the PIONIER data reduction package of
the Jean-Marie Mariotti Center. This research has made use of the Jean-Marie
Mariotti Center SearchCal service, which involves the JSDC and JMDC
catalogues.
References
Acerbi & Ma (2017)
Acerbi, L. & Ma, W. J. 2017, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, ed. I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, & R. Garnett, Vol. 30 (Curran Associates, Inc.)
Andrews et al. (2018)
Andrews, S. M., Huang, J., Pérez, L. M., et al. 2018, ApJ, 869, L41
Andrych et al. (2023)
Andrych, K., Kamath, D., Kluska, J., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 524, 4168
Andrych et al. (2025)
Andrych, K., Kamath, D., Van Winckel, H., et al. 2025, PASA, 1–36
Andrych et al. (2024)
Andrych, K., Kamath, D., Van Winckel, H., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 535, 1763
Anugu et al. (2023)
Anugu, N., Kluska, J., Gardner, T., et al. 2023, ApJ, 950, 149
Arjovsky & Bottou (2017)
Arjovsky, M. & Bottou, L. 2017, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1701.04862
Arjovsky et al. (2017)
Arjovsky, M., Chintala, S., & Bottou, L. 2017, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1701.07875
Artymowicz & Lubow (1994)
Artymowicz, P. & Lubow, S. H. 1994, ApJ, 421, 651
Ataiee et al. (2013)
Ataiee, S., Pinilla, P., Zsom, A., et al. 2013, A&A, 553, L3
Bae et al. (2023)
Bae, J., Isella, A., Zhu, Z., et al. 2023, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 534, Protostars and Planets VII, ed. S. Inutsuka, Y. Aikawa, T. Muto, K. Tomida, & M. Tamura, 423
Bailer-Jones et al. (2021)
Bailer-Jones, C. A. L., Rybizki, J., Fouesneau, M., Demleitner, M., & Andrae, R. 2021, AJ, 161, 147
Balbus & Hawley (1998)
Balbus, S. A. & Hawley, J. F. 1998, Rev. Mod. Phys., 70, 1
Baron et al. (2010)
Baron, F., Monnier, J. D., & Kloppenborg, B. 2010, in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 7734, Optical and Infrared Interferometry II, ed. W. C. Danchi, F. Delplancke, & J. K. Rajagopal, 77342I
Bertolami (2016)
Bertolami, M. M. M. 2016, A&A, 588, A25
Bollen et al. (2022)
Bollen, D., Kamath, D., Van Winckel, H., et al. 2022, A&A, 666, A40
Bujarrabal et al. (2013a)
Bujarrabal, V., Alcolea, J., Van Winckel, H., Santander-García, M., & Castro-Carrizo, A. 2013a, A&A, 557, A104
Bujarrabal et al. (2023)
Bujarrabal, V., Alcolea, J., Castro-Carrizo, A., et al. 2023, A&A, 677, L18
Bujarrabal et al. (2015)
Bujarrabal, V., Castro-Carrizo, A., Alcolea, J., & Van Winckel, H. 2015, A&A, 575, L7
Bujarrabal et al. (2017)
Bujarrabal, V., Castro-Carrizo, A., Alcolea, J., et al. 2017, A&A, 597, L5
Bujarrabal et al. (2018)
Bujarrabal, V., Castro-Carrizo, A., Van Winckel, H., et al. 2018, A&A, 614, A58
Bujarrabal et al. (2013b)
Bujarrabal, V., Castro-Carrizo, A., Alcolea, J., et al. 2013b, A&A, 557, L11
Calcino et al. (2019)
Calcino, J., Price, D. J., Pinte, C., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 490, 2579
Chelli et al. (2016)
Chelli, A., Duvert, G., Bourgès, L., et al. 2016, A&A, 589, A112
Claes et al. (2020)
Claes, R., Kluska, J., Winckel, H. V., & Min, M. 2020, in Optical and Infrared Interferometry and Imaging VII, ed. P. G. Tuthill, A. Mérand, & S. Sallum, Vol. 11446, International Society for Optics and Photonics (SPIE), 114461U
Corporaal et al. (2023a)
Corporaal, A., Kluska, J., Van Winckel, H., et al. 2023a, A&A, 674, A151
Corporaal et al. (2023b)
Corporaal, A., Kluska, J., Van Winckel, H., Kamath, D., & Min, M. 2023b, A&A, 671, A15
de Boer et al. (2016)
de Boer, J., Salter, G., Benisty, M., et al. 2016, A&A, 595, A114
De Prins et al. (2024)
De Prins, T., Van Winckel, H., Ferreira, J., et al. 2024, A&A, 689, A151
de Ruyter et al. (2006)
de Ruyter, S., van Winckel, H., Maas, T., et al. 2006, A&A, 448, 641
Desch & Turner (2015)
Desch, S. J. & Turner, N. J. 2015, ApJ, 811, 156
Dong et al. (2015)
Dong, R., Zhu, Z., Rafikov, R. R., & Stone, J. M. 2015, ApJ, 809, L5
Drevon et al. (2024)
Drevon, J., Millour, F., Cruzalèbes, P., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 527, L88
Efron (1979)
Efron, B. 1979, The Annals of Statistics, 7, 1
Ertel et al. (2019)
Ertel, S., Kamath, D., Hillen, M., et al. 2019, AJ, 157, 110
Facchini et al. (2013)
Facchini, S., Lodato, G., & Price, D. J. 2013, MNRAS, 433, 2142
Flock et al. (2016)
Flock, M., Fromang, S., Turner, N. J., & Benisty, M. 2016, ApJ, 827, 144
Flock et al. (2017)
Flock, M., Fromang, S., Turner, N. J., & Benisty, M. 2017, ApJ, 835, 230
Flock et al. (2019)
Flock, M., Turner, Neal J., Mulders, Gijs D., et al. 2019, A&A, 630, A147
Foreman-Mackey et al. (2013)
Foreman-Mackey, D., Hogg, D. W., Lang, D., & Goodman, J. 2013, PASP, 125, 306
Gallardo Cava et al. (2021)
Gallardo Cava, I., Gómez-Garrido, M., Bujarrabal, V., et al. 2021, A&A, 648, A93
Garufi et al. (2024)
Garufi, A., Ginski, C., van Holstein, R. G., et al. 2024, A&A, 685, A53
Gewers et al. (2021)
Gewers, F. L., Ferreira, G. R., Arruda, H. F. D., et al. 2021, ACM Comput. Surv., 54
Gielen et al. (2008)
Gielen, C., Van Winckel, H., Min, M., Waters, L. B. F. M., & Lloyd Evans, T. 2008, A&A, 490, 725
Giridhar et al. (1998)
Giridhar, S., Lambert, D. L., & Gonzalez, G. 1998, ApJ, 509, 366
Giridhar et al. (2005)
Giridhar, S., Lambert, D. L., Reddy, B. E., Gonzalez, G., & Yong, D. 2005, ApJ, 627, 432
Giridhar et al. (1994)
Giridhar, S., Rao, N. K., & Lambert, D. L. 1994, ApJ, 437, 476
Goodfellow et al. (2014)
Goodfellow, I. J., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., et al. 2014, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1406.2661
Gorlova et al. (2012)
Gorlova, N., Van Winckel, H., Gielen, C., et al. 2012, A&A, 542, A27
GRAVITY Collaboration et al. (2019)
GRAVITY Collaboration, Perraut, K., Labadie, L., et al. 2019, A&A, 632, A53
Haguenauer et al. (2010)
Haguenauer, P., Alonso, J., Bourget, P., et al. 2010, in Optical and Infrared Interferometry II, Vol. 7734 (SPIE), 773404
Hillen et al. (2015)
Hillen, M., de Vries, B. L., Menu, J., et al. 2015, A&A, 578, A40
Hillen et al. (2016)
Hillen, M., Kluska, J., Le Bouquin, J.-B., et al. 2016, A&A, 588, L1
Hillen et al. (2014)
Hillen, M., Menu, J., Van Winckel, H., et al. 2014, A&A, 568, A12
Hillen et al. (2017)
Hillen, M., Van Winckel, H., Menu, J., et al. 2017, A&A, 599, A41
Hirsh et al. (2020)
Hirsh, K., Price, D. J., Gonzalez, J.-F., Ubeira-Gabellini, M. G., & Ragusa, E. 2020, MNRAS, 498, 2936
Hofmann et al. (2022)
Hofmann, K.-H., Bensberg, A., Schertl, D., et al. 2022, A&A, 658, A81
Ibrahim et al. (2023)
Ibrahim, N., Monnier, J. D., Kraus, S., et al. 2023, ApJ, 947, 68
Jankovic et al. (2021)
Jankovic, M. R., Owen, J. E., Mohanty, S., & Tan, J. C. 2021, MNRAS, 504, 280
Kama et al. (2015)
Kama, M., Folsom, C. P., & Pinilla, P. 2015, A&A, 582, L10
Kama et al. (2009)
Kama, M., Min, M., & Dominik, C. 2009, A&A, 506, 1199
Kamath et al. (2014)
Kamath, D., Wood, P. R., & Van Winckel, H. 2014, MNRAS, 439, 2211
Kamath et al. (2015)
Kamath, D., Wood, P. R., & Van Winckel, H. 2015, MNRAS, 454, 1468
Kipper (2013)
Kipper, T. 2013, Baltic Astronomy, 22, 101
Kiss & Bódi (2017)
Kiss, L. L. & Bódi, A. 2017, A&A, 608, A99
Kiss et al. (2007)
Kiss, L. L., Derekas, A., Szabó, G. M., Bedding, T. R., & Szabados, L. 2007, MNRAS, 375, 1338
Kluska et al. (2016)
Kluska, J., Benisty, M., Soulez, F., et al. 2016, A&A, 591, A82
Kluska et al. (2020a)
Kluska, J., Berger, J.-P., Malbet, F., et al. 2020a, A&A, 636, A116
Kluska et al. (2018)
Kluska, J., Hillen, M., Van Winckel, H., et al. 2018, A&A, 616, A153
Kluska et al. (2014)
Kluska, J., Malbet, F., Berger, J.-P., et al. 2014, A&A, 564, A80
Kluska et al. (2020b)
Kluska, J., Olofsson, H., Van Winckel, H., et al. 2020b, A&A, 642, A152
Kluska et al. (2022)
Kluska, J., Van Winckel, H., Coppée, Q., et al. 2022, A&A, 658, A36
Kluska et al. (2019)
Kluska, J., Van Winckel, H., Hillen, M., et al. 2019, A&A, 631, A108
Kraus et al. (2008)
Kraus, S., Preibisch, T., & Ohnaka, K. 2008, ApJ, 676, 490
Lazareff et al. (2017)
Lazareff, B., Berger, J.-P., Kluska, J., et al. 2017, A&A, 599, A85
Le Bouquin et al. (2011)
Le Bouquin, J.-B., Berger, J.-P., Lazareff, B., et al. 2011, A&A, 535, A67
Levis et al. (2024)
Levis, A., Chael, A. A., Bouman, K. L., Wielgus, M., & Srinivasan, P. P. 2024, Nature Astronomy, 8, 765
Lilley et al. (2026)
Lilley, L., Norris, B., Tuthill, P., et al. 2026, Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems, 12, 018001
Lloyd (1982)
Lloyd, S. 1982, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 28, 129
Lovelace et al. (1999)
Lovelace, R. V. E., Li, H., Colgate, S. A., & Nelson, A. F. 1999, ApJ, 513, 805
Lucas et al. (2024)
Lucas, M., Norris, B., Guyon, O., et al. 2024, PASP, 136, 114504
Lyra & Mac Low (2012)
Lyra, W. & Mac Low, M.-M. 2012, ApJ, 756, 62
Maas et al. (2005)
Maas, T., Van Winckel, H., & Lloyd Evans, T. 2005, A&A, 429, 297
Manick et al. (2017)
Manick, R., Van Winckel, H., Kamath, D., Hillen, M., & Escorza, A. 2017, A&A, 597, A129
Marquardt (1963)
Marquardt, D. W. 1963, Journal of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 11, 431
Meheut et al. (2012)
Meheut, H., Keppens, R., Casse, F., & Benz, W. 2012, A&A, 542, A9
Meheut et al. (2013)
Meheut, H., Lovelace, R. V. E., & Lai, D. 2013, MNRAS, 430, 1988
Mérand (2022)
Mérand, A. 2022, in Optical and Infrared Interferometry and Imaging VIII, ed. A. Mérand, S. Sallum, & J. Sanchez-Bermudez, Vol. 12183, International Society for Optics and Photonics (SPIE), 121831N
Min et al. (2009)
Min, M., Dullemond, C. P., Dominik, C., de Koter, A., & Hovenier, J. W. 2009, A&A, 497, 155
Mohorian et al. (2025)
Mohorian, M., Kamath, D., Menon, M., et al. 2025, MNRAS, 538, 1339
Mohorian et al. (2024)
Mohorian, M., Kamath, D., Menon, M., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 530, 761
Monnier et al. (2012)
Monnier, J. D., Che, X., Zhao, M., et al. 2012, ApJS, 761, L3
Nagel et al. (2010)
Nagel, E., D’Alessio, P., Calvet, N., et al. 2010, ApJ, 708, 38
Nealon et al. (2018)
Nealon, R., Dipierro, G., Alexander, R., Martin, R. G., & Nixon, C. 2018, MNRAS, 481, 20
Oomen et al. (2018)
Oomen, G.-M., Van Winckel, H., Pols, O., et al. 2018, A&A, 620, A85
Oomen et al. (2019)
Oomen, G.-M., Van Winckel, Hans, Pols, Onno, & Nelemans, Gijs. 2019, A&A, 629, A49
Pinilla et al. (2012)
Pinilla, P., Benisty, M., & Birnstiel, T. 2012, A&A, 545, A81
Pinte et al. (2009)
Pinte, C., Harries, T. J., Min, M., et al. 2009, A&A, 498, 967
Pinte et al. (2006)
Pinte, C., Ménard, F., Duchêne, G., & Bastien, P. 2006, A&A, 459, 797
Planquart et al. (2024)
Planquart, L., Paladini, C., Jorissen, A., et al. 2024, A&A, 687, A306
Price et al. (2018)
Price, D. J., Cuello, N., Pinte, C., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 477, 1270
Ragusa et al. (2020)
Ragusa, E., Alexander, R., Calcino, J., Hirsh, K., & Price, D. J. 2020, MNRAS, 499, 3362
Ragusa et al. (2017)
Ragusa, E., Dipierro, G., Lodato, G., Laibe, G., & Price, D. J. 2017, MNRAS, 464, 1449
Rao & Giridhar (2014)
Rao, S. S. & Giridhar, S. 2014, Rev. Mexicana Astron. Astrofis., 50, 49
Rasmussen & Williams (2006)
Rasmussen, C. E. & Williams, C. K. I. 2006, Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning (The MIT Press)
Ren et al. (2020)
Ren, B., Dong, R., van Holstein, R. G., et al. 2020, ApJ, 898, L38
Renard et al. (2011)
Renard, S., Thiébaut, E., & Malbet, F. 2011, A&A, 533, A64
Rudin et al. (1992)
Rudin, L. I., Osher, S., & Fatemi, E. 1992, Physica D Nonlinear Phenomena, 60, 259
Sahai et al. (2011)
Sahai, R., Claussen, M. J., Schnee, S., Morris, M. R., & Sánchez Contreras, C. 2011, ApJ, 739, L3
Schwarz (1978)
Schwarz, G. 1978, Annals of Statistics, 6, 461
Scicluna et al. (2020)
Scicluna, P., Kemper, F., Trejo, A., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 494, 2925
Setterholm et al. (2025)
Setterholm, B. R., Monnier, J. D., Baron, F., et al. 2025, AJ, 169, 318
Shi et al. (2012)
Shi, J.-M., Krolik, J. H., Lubow, S. H., & Hawley, J. F. 2012, ApJ, 749, 118
Singh & Acerbi (2024)
Singh, G. S. & Acerbi, L. 2024, Journal of Open Source Software, 9, 5694
Thiébaut & Young (2017)
Thiébaut, E. & Young, J. 2017, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 34, 904
Tremblay et al. (2016)
Tremblay, P.-E., Cummings, J., Kalirai, J. S., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 461, 2100
Ulyanov et al. (2020)
Ulyanov, D., Vedaldi, A., & Lempitsky, V. 2020, International Journal of Computer Vision, 128, 1867–1888
Van Winckel (1997)
Van Winckel, H. 1997, A&A, 319, 561
Van Winckel (2003)
Van Winckel, H. 2003, ARA&A, 41, 391
Van Winckel (2019)
Van Winckel, H. 2019, in The Impact of Binary Stars on Stellar Evolution (Cambridge University Press), 92–105
Van Winckel (2025)
Van Winckel, H. 2025, Galaxies, 13, 68
Van Winckel et al. (2009)
Van Winckel, H., Lloyd Evans, T., Briquet, M., et al. 2009, A&A, 505, 1221
Van Winckel et al. (1999)
Van Winckel, H., Waelkens, C., Fernie, J. D., & Waters, L. B. F. M. 1999, A&A, 343, 202
Van Winckel et al. (1995)
Van Winckel, H., Waelkens, C., & Waters, L. B. F. M. 1995, A&A, 293, L25
Varga et al. (2021)
Varga, J., Hogerheijde, M., van Boekel, R., et al. 2021, A&A, 647, A56
Verhamme et al. (2024)
Verhamme, O., Kluska, J., Ferreira, J., et al. 2024, A&A, 684, A79
Waelkens et al. (1991a)
Waelkens, C., Lamers, H. J. G. L. M., Waters, L. B. F. M., et al. 1991a, A&A, 242, 433
Waelkens et al. (1991b)
Waelkens, C., Van Winckel, H., Bogaert, E., & Trams, N. R. 1991b, A&A, 251, 495
Wang & Wu (2023)
Wang, Z. & Wu, L. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2305.08404
Weigelt et al. (2016)
Weigelt, G., Hofmann, K. H., Schertl, D., et al. 2016, A&A, 594, A106
Young et al. (2023)
Young, A. K., Stevenson, S., Nixon, C. J., & Rice, K. 2023, MNRAS, 525, 2616
\nolinenumbers
Appendix A
Individual target descriptions
Below, we provide a more extensive discussion of our selected targets in the context of the existing literature, focusing
on known properties and previous studies which provide insights on the structure
and morphological complexity of the circumbinary disc.
A.1
AI Sco
AI Sco’s primary is non- to weakly-depleted, as marked by its low zinc over
titanium abundance of
[
Zn
/
Ti
]
∼
0.3
​
dex
\mathrm{[Zn/Ti]}\!\sim\!0.3\,\mathrm{dex}
(Giridhar et al.,
2005
)
.
It is an RV Tauri type pulsator, and clearly shows the ’RVb’ phenomenon
(Kiss et al.,
2007
)
. This binary-associated effect describes a long-term
modulation of photometric brightness superimposed on the shorter period
variations caused by RV Tau-like pulsations. The modulation periods typically
match with spectroscopically derived orbital periods, and the primary star
is often faintest and reddest at inferior conjunction. This supports the usual
interpretation that the effect is caused by variable extinction along the line-of-sight
(LOS) to the primary as it grazes the inner rim of the dusty circumbinary disc
(e.g. Kiss et al.,
2007
; Manick et al.,
2017
)
.
Detection of the RVb phenomenon is hence though to imply a high inclination for the circumbinary
dust disc – though
(Kluska et al.,
2019
)
found that the RVb phenomenon can occur for moderately inclined systems. While originally coined for RV Tauri stars, the term ’RVb
phenomenon’ is broadly used for any post-AGB system showing a similar long-term brightness modulation,
regardless of whether the object is an RV Tauri pulsator or not.
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
performed geometric modelling on a PIONIER snapshot survey
of disc-bearing post-AGB binaries using models of varying complexity. The
most complex models include a binary star, an up to second order azimuthally
modulated Gaussian inner disc rim and an over-resolved background flux.
This resulted in a best-fit model for AI Sco with a strong secondary
detection at a flux fraction of
f
sec
,
0
=
24.7
−
6.9
+
6.5
%
f_{\mathrm{sec,0}}=24.7^{+6.5}_{-6.9}\,\mathrm{\%}
(defined at reference
wavelength
λ
0
=
1.65
​
μ
​
m
\lambda_{0}=1.65\,\mathrm{\mu m}
), a weak background flux at
f
bg
,
0
=
1.1
±
0.4
%
f_{\mathrm{bg,0}}=1.1\pm 0.4\,\mathrm{\%}
and an inner rim with diameter
θ
rim
=
4.6
±
0.2
​
mas
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}=4.6\pm 0.2\,\mathrm{mas}
, inclination
i
rim
=
47.3
−
2.6
+
2.3
∘
i_{\mathrm{rim}}={47.3^{+2.3}_{-2.6}}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
and position angle
PA
rim
=
179
∘
−
3
+
3
\mathrm{PA}_{\mathrm{rim}}=179{{}^{+3}_{-3}}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
. An inclined circular
inner rim appears as an ellipse due to its projection on the plane of the sky.
For a symmetrically and passively irradiated smooth disc, the primary
H
H
band
brightness enhancement of the inner rim lies along the long side of the ellipse,
symmetric with respect to the projected minor axis, due to self-absorption
of the near side’s emission
(e.g. Hofmann et al.,
2022
)
. The main brightness
enhancement of AI Sco’s inner rim in the
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
model instead
lies along the short side of the projected rim, seemingly in phase with the
binary position of the primary (see their Fig. C.1 for model images of
the disc rims).
A.2
EN TrA
EN TrA’s primary is mildly depleted at
[
Zn
/
Ti
]
∼
0.6
​
dex
\mathrm{[Zn/Ti]}\!\sim\!0.6\,\mathrm{dex}
(Van Winckel,
1997
)
. It is an RV Tau pulsator, but no firm
detection of the RVb phenomenon has been established yet
(Van Winckel et al.,
2009
)
.
The best-fit model by
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
shows a significant contribution from
the secondary
f
sec
,
0
=
7.8
−
1.2
+
1.7
%
f_{\mathrm{sec,0}}=7.8^{+1.7}_{-1.2}\,\mathrm{\%}
, a
weak over-resolved background
f
bg
,
0
=
2.5
−
1.0
+
0.9
%
f_{\mathrm{bg,0}}=2.5_{-1.0}^{+0.9}\,\mathrm{\%}
, and an inner rim with
diameter
θ
rim
=
7.7
−
1.6
+
1.7
​
mas
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}=7.7^{+1.7}_{-1.6}\,\mathrm{mas}
and orientation
of
i
rim
=
52.7
−
9.1
+
7.8
∘
i_{\mathrm{rim}}=52.7^{+7.8}_{-9.1}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
and
PA
rim
=
13
−
7
+
9
∘
\mathrm{PA}_{\mathrm{rim}}=13^{+9}_{-7}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
. A strong azimuthal brightness enhancement
of the model disc appears aligned with the long side of the projected
ellipse, which is also in phase with the position of the primary.
A.3
HD 95767
HD 95767 has a non-depleted primary at
[
Zn
/
Ti
]
∼
0.0
​
dex
\mathrm{[Zn/Ti]}\!\sim\!0.0\,\mathrm{dex}
(Van Winckel,
1997
)
.
Kiss et al. (
2007
)
marked it as a low-amplitude
semi-regular or multiply periodic variable and firmly detected the RVb
phenomenon, implying a possibly high inclination for the circumbinary disc.
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
fitted a model with a strong secondary companion flux at
f
sec
,
0
=
12.3
−
1.2
+
2.3
%
f_{\mathrm{sec,0}}=12.3^{+2.3}_{-1.2}\,\mathrm{\%}
, a weak background
at
f
bg
,
0
=
1.1
−
0.7
+
0.8
%
f_{\mathrm{bg,0}}=1.1^{+0.8}_{-0.7}\,\mathrm{\%}
, and, contrary to
what is expected from the clear presence of the RVb phenomenon, a pole-on inner
rim at a diameter of
θ
rim
=
6.8
−
0.5
+
0.4
​
mas
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}=6.8^{+0.4}_{-0.5}\,\mathrm{mas}
.
The main brightness enhancement along the rim seemed in phase with the
primary’s position.
The polar orientation derived by
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
is likely an artefact from
their extremely sparse
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage, covering only the small AT
baselines. Our imaging results instead find a significantly non-zero inclination (Table
3
).
A.4
HD 108015
HD 108015’s primary is non-depleted at
[
Zn
/
Ti
]
∼
0.1
​
dex
\mathrm{[Zn/Ti]\!\sim\!0.1\,\mathrm{dex}}
(Van Winckel,
1997
)
. It was marked as a low-amplitude
semi-regular or multiply periodic variable without an RVb phenomenon by
Kiss et al. (
2007
)
.
The best-fit model of
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
shows no detection of the
secondary, a significant background flux at
f
b
​
g
,
0
=
8.5
±
0.4
%
f_{bg,0}=8.5\pm 0.4\,\mathrm{\%}
and an inner rim with diameter
θ
rim
=
6.7
±
0.1
​
mas
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}=6.7\pm 0.1\,\mathrm{mas}
and a low-inclination orientation of
i
rim
=
12.9
−
5.9
+
4.7
∘
i_{\mathrm{rim}}=12.9^{+4.7}_{-5.9}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
and
PA
rim
=
40
−
19
+
16
∘
\mathrm{PA}_{\mathrm{rim}}=40^{+16}_{-19}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
. The main
brightness enhancement along the rim is out of phase with the primary’s
position relative to the rim centre (with the primary’s projected position
likely being mostly a projection effect; see Sect.
5.3.4
),
and is instead shifted counter-clockwise. Geometric modelling of snapshot VLTI/MATISSE data by
Corporaal et al. (
2023a
)
using a model consisting of the primary and a power-law surface brightness
disc (and modelling only the
V
​
2
V2
data) resulted in a much smaller inner rim
disc diameter of
θ
rim
=
3.4
±
0.6
/
3.6
±
0.2
​
mas
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}=3.4\pm 0.6/3.6\pm 0.2\,\mathrm{mas}
in
L
L
/
N
N
band respectively. The fitted orientation of the disc was
i
rim
=
35
±
11
/
32
±
2
∘
i_{\mathrm{rim}}=35\pm 11/32\pm 2\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
and
PA
rim
=
45
±
13
/
15
±
2
∘
\mathrm{PA}_{\mathrm{rim}}=45\pm 13/15\pm 2\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
, which seems
inconsistent with the lower inclination found by
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
.
These inconsistencies between geometric modelling studies are likely
caused by their sparse
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverages, causing strong parameter degeneracies
between the rim size, orientation, and azimuthal and radial extent of the emission
(this is why the rim orientation is best fixed during geometric modelling
if constraints from other sources are available, as in e.g.
Setterholm et al.
2025
).
This is compounded by the use of qualitatively different disc radial intensity
profiles (Gaussian profiles in
Kluska et al.
2019
versus radial power laws
in
Corporaal et al.
2023a
). Our imaging results (Table
3
)
are more consistent with the rim size found by
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
, but
also more consistent with the inclination found by
Corporaal et al. (
2023b
)
.
We note that this does not invalidate the findings of either study, as each
was internally consistent in their geometric modelling approach, and their
main results were based on general distributions of the fitted parameters
(and, in the case of
Corporaal et al.
2023b
, the relative comparison
between different SED categories).
A.5
HR 4049
HR 4049 is an extremely depleted system, hallmarked by its remarkably low
metallicity
[
Fe
/
H
]
∼
−
4.8
​
dex
\mathrm{[Fe/H]}\!\sim\!-4.8\,\mathrm{dex}
and high zinc
over iron ratio
[
Zn
/
Fe
]
∼
3.5
​
dex
\mathrm{[Zn/Fe]}\!\sim\!3.5\,\mathrm{dex}
(Van Winckel et al.,
1995
; Oomen et al.,
2019
)
.
Photometric studies identified the primary as non-pulsating, but the RVb phenomenon
was firmly detected
(Waelkens et al.,
1991a
; Kiss et al.,
2007
)
.
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
fitted a model with a fairly weak secondary flux fraction at
f
sec
,
0
=
2.5
−
0.8
+
1.1
%
f_{\mathrm{sec,0}}=2.5^{+1.1}_{-0.8}\,\mathrm{\%}
and strong
background contribution of
f
bg
,
0
=
17.0
±
0.7
%
f_{\mathrm{bg,0}}=17.0\pm 0.7\,\mathrm{\%}
. The fitter inner rim presented
a diameter of
θ
rim
=
16.4
±
0.5
​
mas
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}=16.4\pm 0.5\,\mathrm{mas}
and orientation
i
rim
=
49.3
−
3.3
+
3.2
∘
i_{\mathrm{rim}}=49.3^{+3.2}_{-3.3}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
and
PA
rim
=
63
−
6
+
7
∘
\mathrm{PA}_{\mathrm{rim}}=63^{+7}_{-6}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
. While a secondary brightness enhancement
was in phase with the primary position, the main brightness enhancement appeared
on the opposite side along the major axis of the projected disc.
The surface of the outer disc regions was imaged in the SPHERE/IRDIS
H
H
band
polarimetric imaging study of eight disc-bearing post-AGB binaries by
Andrych et al. (
2023
)
.
The outer discs in this study appear as a bright central ’ring’, marked by
a low intensity cavity in the centre. This cavity is an artefact of the image
reduction, caused by the subtraction of the central unresolved polarised
flux. The disc orientation derived from this ring was deemed unreliable,
as it provides a low inclination (
i
∼
16.8
∘
i\!\sim\!16.8^{\circ}
) incompatible
with the robust detection of the RVb phenomenon and the results of
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
(as well as our imaging results; Table
3
). The circumbinary
disc otherwise showed no potential substructures on the scales probed by IRDIS.
A.6
IRAS 15469-5311
IRAS 15469-5311’s primary is strongly depleted with
[
Zn
/
Ti
]
∼
1.8
​
dex
\mathrm{[Zn/Ti]}\!\sim\!1.8\,\mathrm{dex}
(Maas et al.,
2005
)
. While the primary pulsates,
the pulsation pattern seems rather erratic, and not consistent with a classical
RV Tau variable
(Kiss et al.,
2007
)
. No clear photometric detection of an
RVb phenomenon has been published yet. The
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
PIONIER snapshot
model fit consists of a binary star, a significant over-resolved
background at
f
bg
,
0
=
12.8
−
0.6
+
0.5
%
f_{\mathrm{bg,0}}=12.8^{+0.5}_{-0.6}\,\mathrm{\%}
and an
inner rim with diameter
θ
rim
=
10.4
±
0.3
​
mas
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}=10.4\pm 0.3\,\mathrm{mas}
and orientation
i
rim
=
53.5
−
2.2
+
1.8
∘
i_{\mathrm{rim}}={53.5^{+1.8}_{-2.2}}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
and
PA
rim
=
64
∘
−
2
+
2
\mathrm{PA}_{\mathrm{rim}}=64{{}^{+2}_{-2}}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
. The secondary
detection was highly tentative, with a flux fraction of only
f
sec
,
0
=
0.1
−
0.1
+
0.1
%
f_{\mathrm{sec,0}}=0.1^{+0.1}_{-0.1}\,\mathrm{\%}
. The primary brightness
enhancement lies along the long side of the projected rim, and is not in
phase with the primary’s position, consistent with the expected RT effects
of a symmetrically illuminated, smooth inclined disc rim. The MATISSE snapshot
modelling by
Corporaal et al. (
2023a
)
resulted in a disc with an orientation
of
i
rim
=
47
±
5
∘
i_{\mathrm{rim}}=47\pm 5\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
and
PA
rim
=
50
±
4
∘
\mathrm{PA}_{\mathrm{rim}}=50\pm 4\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
. The inner rim diameter
was found to be much smaller than the
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
value, at
θ
rim
=
3.4
±
0.4
​
mas
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}=3.4\pm 0.4\,\mathrm{mas}
. As for HD 108015, this is most probably caused
by sparse
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverages and the resulting strong parameter degeneracies.
The outer disc surface was polarimetrically imaged by
Andrych et al. (
2023
)
,
revealing a bright central ring at an orientation of
i
rim
=
19.6
−
16
+
18
∘
i_{\mathrm{rim}}={19.6^{+18}_{-16}}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
and
PA
rim
=
139
−
30
+
27
∘
\mathrm{PA}_{\mathrm{rim}}={139^{+27}_{-30}}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
.
This orientation differs from that of the disc inner rim found by
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
and
Corporaal et al. (
2023a
)
, again possibly due to data reduction artefacts
affecting the central ring. These SPHERE observations also showed a
secondary ring-like substructure offset from the central ring (see their Fig. 5).
Interpreting these as part of one continuous disc,
Andrych et al. (
2023
)
derived a disc scale height of
∼
190
​
AU
\sim\!190\,\mathrm{AU}
at a separation
of
∼
1100
​
AU
\sim\!1100\,\mathrm{AU}
.
A.7
IW Car
IW Car is strongly depleted at
[
Zn
/
Ti
]
∼
2.1
​
dex
\mathrm{[Zn/Ti]}\!\sim\!2.1\,\mathrm{dex}
(Giridhar et al.,
1994
)
. It
is an RV Tau pulsator with a firmly detected RVb phenomenon
(Kiss & Bódi,
2017
)
.
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
fitted an inner rim model with a binary
f
sec
,
0
=
3.5
±
0.1
%
f_{\mathrm{sec,0}}=3.5\pm 0.1\,\mathrm{\%}
and a significant over-resolved component at
f
bg
,
0
=
10.5
±
0.3
%
f_{\mathrm{bg,0}}=10.5\pm 0.3\,\mathrm{\%}
. The fitted inner rim had
a large diameter of
θ
rim
=
23.0
−
0.6
+
0.7
​
mas
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}=23.0^{+0.7}_{-0.6}\,\mathrm{mas}
and was
remarkably broad (Gaussian full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) equal to
0.71
±
0.02
​
θ
rim
0.71\pm 0.02\,\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}
). The rim was oriented at
i
rim
=
44.6
−
1.8
+
1.7
∘
i_{\mathrm{rim}}=44.6^{+1.7}_{-1.8}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
and
PA
rim
=
155
±
2
∘
\mathrm{PA}_{\mathrm{rim}}=155\pm 2\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
.
Corporaal et al. (
2023a
)
fitted a smaller inner rim using
VLTI/MATISSE at
θ
rim
=
4.4
±
0.4
/
4.8
±
0.2
​
mas
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}=4.4\pm 0.4/4.8\pm 0.2\,\mathrm{mas}
in
L
L
/
N
N
band respectively (likely probing the inner flux arcs we
resolve in our imaging; Sect.
5.3.7
),
though the model generally fails to fit the large baseline data in the
L
L
band.
IW Car was included in the SPHERE/IRDIS study of
Andrych et al. (
2023
)
,
where the system clearly presented a bright arc to the east of the usual
central ring, separated by a dark shadow (see their Fig. 5). This was interpreted
as scattered light from the two sides of the disc, separated by the
optically thick near-side mid-plane, leading to a disc scale height estimate
of
∼
190
​
AU
\sim\!190\,\mathrm{AU}
. The central ring orientation was found to
be,
i
rim
=
41.7
−
7.7
+
6.5
∘
i_{\mathrm{rim}}=41.7^{+6.5}_{-7.7}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
and
PA
rim
=
161
−
10
+
12
∘
\mathrm{PA}_{\mathrm{rim}}=161^{+12}_{-10}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
, though it could again be
affected by reduction artefacts.
A.8
PS Gem
PS Gem, similar to HR 4049, shows an extremely low metallicity and
depleted primary at
[
Fe
/
H
]
∼
−
4.5
​
dex
\mathrm{[Fe/H]\!\sim\!-4.5\,\mathrm{dex}}
and
[
Zn
/
Ti
]
∼
3.0
​
dex
\mathrm{[Zn/Ti]\!\sim\!3.0\,\mathrm{dex}}
. While not a regular RV Tauri
variable, it does show the RVb phenomenon
(Waelkens et al.,
1991b
; Kipper,
2013
; Rao & Giridhar,
2014
)
.
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
fitted a binary model to their PIONIER data, with no
contribution of any disc signal. In addition to a background flux at
f
bkg
,
0
=
4.3
−
0.8
+
0.7
%
f_{\mathrm{bkg,0}}=4.3^{+0.7}_{-0.8}\,\mathrm{\%}
, the fitted secondary flux fraction was
relatively weak at
f
sec
,
0
=
2.4
−
0.3
+
1.6
%
f_{\mathrm{sec,0}}=2.4^{+1.6}_{-0.3}\,\mathrm{\%}
,
and its position relative to the primary was very poorly constrained at
Δ
​
α
sec
=
3.3
−
35.6
+
32.5
​
mas
\Delta\alpha_{\mathrm{sec}}=3.3^{+32.5}_{-35.6}\,\mathrm{mas}
and
Δ
​
δ
sec
=
5.0
−
21.6
+
23.7
​
mas
\Delta\delta_{\mathrm{sec}}=5.0^{+23.7}_{-21.6}\,\mathrm{mas}
. Indeed,
we do not recover a significant secondary detection in this study. The lack
of disc signal in
Kluska et al. (
2019
)
was likley caused due to PS Gem’s
extremely poor
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage (a single snapshot at short baselines), as
well as the generally low flux contribution of the disc (as found in this
work; e.g. Table
3
).
Appendix B
Geometric model images and synthetic data reconstructions
Images of the final PMOIRED geometric disc models fitted to our targets (Table
2
)
are shown in Fig.
8
. These images show the
underlying analytical intensity distributions used to initially model the
inner disc rim in Sect.
4.2
. We stress that the goal of these geometric models is not to fully reproduce the complex rim emission morphology or act as initial starting images for the image reconstructions, but to procure preliminary estimates for the SPARCO parameters as initial values for the BADS SPARCO optimisation routine (Sect.
4.3.2
). As such, we have only included up to one order of azimuthal modulation for the rim brightness profile, which can cause morphological model biases if the true underlying azimuthal brightness profiles have sharper features or are generally more complex (e.g. AI Sco’s model reaching only a poor goodness of fit at
χ
ν
2
∼
5
\chi^{2}_{\nu}\sim 5
and being biased in
PA
\mathrm{PA}
towards the primary; Sect.
5.3.1
). Nevertheless, analysing the behaviour of reconstructions of these models under analogous circumstances to our INSPIRING datasets can help identify potential biases in the imaging procedure and rim parameter derivation.
Figure 8
:
Analytical PMOIRED model disc images (Table
2
).
All other symbols are analogous to those in Figs.
3
&
4
.
B.1
Bias assessment through synthetic reconstructions
To assess potential biases in our imaging workflow (Sect.
4.3
) which might affect the interpretation of the final images, we applied our ORGANIC workflow on synthetic
V
​
2
V2
and
ϕ
​
3
\phi 3
datasets derived from the PMOIRED geometric models. This includes BADS optimisation of the free SPARCO parameters (
f
prim
,
0
f_{\mathrm{prim,0}}
,
UD
prim
\mathrm{UD_{prim}}
,
f
sec
,
0
f_{\mathrm{sec,0}}
&
d
rim
d_{\mathrm{{rim}}}
; starting from their values in Table
2
). The synthetic datasets use the same
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage and noise levels as the observations (Figs.
1
&
14
). The imaging parameters (
SF
\mathrm{SF}
,
PS
\mathrm{PS}
&
FOV
\mathrm{FOV}
) were set to those used in Table
3
.
We focus on assessing any potential biases in the image-derived rim parameters, as well as the position of morphological features such as azimuthal brightness enhancements. The rim parameters themselves, including
θ
rim
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}
,
i
rim
i_{\mathrm{rim}}
and
PA
rim
\mathrm{PA}_{\mathrm{rim}}
, are chosen from Table
2
for the geometric models themselves, and are derived from the reconstructions following the rim fitting routine described in Sect.
5.1
. Radial brightness profiles were then calculated following Sect.
5.1
. In addition, we also calculated the azimuthal brightness profiles by integrating the flux along radial rays from the rim centre, separated by
0.1
∘
0.1^{\mathrm{\circ}}
in on-sky position angle
PA
\mathrm{PA}
, within elliptical apertures following the rim orientation. We show the images reconstructed from the synthetic model datasets versus their ground truth counterparts in Fig.
9
. The corresponding brightness profiles are given in Fig.
9
. The image-derived rim parameters are given in Table
4
.
We find the following potential biases for the rim parameters (we discuss those that are of
≥
2
​
σ
\geq 2\sigma
significance) and rim morphology of note for each of our targets:
AI Sco:
comparing the reconstruction with the model ground truth in Fig.
9
, we note that the reconstructed disc flux close to the position of the primary star is biased in position by about
∼
1
​
mas
\sim\!1\,\mathrm{mas}
southwards from where it is supposed to be, and seems systematically fainter. This also causes the reconstructed radial brightness profile to be slightly shifted and extended inwards, and the peak of the azimuthal brightness profile to be slightly shifted (by
∼
20
∘
\sim\!20^{\circ}
in
PA
\mathrm{PA}
) from its fiducial position (Fig.
10
). This artefact is likely caused by the close approach of the primary to the rim, and the sparsity of north- and north-west oriented long-baseline observations (Fig.
1
). This causes the reconstruction routine to be unable to fully distinguish between flux from the primary’s position and flux from the nearest part of the rim. This artefact can also be seen in both our final ORGANIC reconstructions (Fig.
3
) and the additional SQUEEZE reconstructions (Fig.
12
). Nevertheless, this does not affect our main imaging results significantly: the brightness enhancement is heavily shifted towards the rim’s projected major axis (Sect.
5.3.1
). All rim parameters are properly retrieved without clear biases (i.e. consistency within
2
​
σ
2\sigma
between Tables
4
&
2
).
EN TrA:
comparing Tables
4
​&​
2
, we note a bias of
0.87
−
0.16
+
0.20
​
mas
0.87^{+0.20}_{-0.16}\,\mathrm{mas}
in
θ
rim
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}
and of
−
7
−
2
+
2
∘
-7^{+2}_{-2}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
in
i
rim
i_{\mathrm{rim}}
. These are caused by the limited resolution of the interferometer, which smears out the infinitely sharp model rim, where the model intensity suddenly jumps from zero before decaying with a power law. This pulls the intensity peak slightly backward and blurs the sharp ellipticity of the model rim. This induces a systematic positive bias for
θ
rim
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}
, and a negative bias for
i
rim
i_{\mathrm{rim}}
. These biases are a common occurrence for our targets, as seen from the discussion of the other targets below. There is also a slight potential bias in
Δ
​
α
rim
\mathrm{\Delta\alpha_{rim}}
of
0.09
−
0.04
+
0.04
​
mas
0.09^{+0.04}_{-0.04}\,\mathrm{mas}
. Nevertheless, these findings do not significantly affect our main results: the brightness enhancement is positioned along the rim’s projected major axis (Sect.
5.3.2
). Aside from some mild flux leakage into the central cavity, the brightness profiles are generally well-recovered (Fig.
10
).
HD 95767:
we note a bias of
0.99
−
0.05
+
0.06
​
mas
0.99^{+0.06}_{-0.05}\,\mathrm{mas}
in
θ
rim
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}
and of
−
6
−
3
+
3
∘
-6^{+3}_{-3}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
in
i
rim
i_{\mathrm{rim}}
(Tables
4
&
3
). There is also a slight potential bias in
Δ
​
α
rim
\mathrm{\Delta\alpha_{rim}}
of
−
0.09
−
0.03
+
0.03
​
mas
-0.09^{+0.03}_{-0.03}\,\mathrm{mas}
. These do not affect the main results discussed in Sect.
5.3.3
: the final image is highly sensitive to
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage specifics and is hence not included in the discussion on potential substructures. The radial and azimuthal profile are well-recovered (Fig.
10
).
HD 108015:
we note a bias of
0.68
−
0.06
+
0.06
​
mas
0.68^{+0.06}_{-0.06}\,\mathrm{mas}
in
θ
rim
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}
and of
−
4.9
−
0.9
+
1.6
∘
-4.9^{+1.6}_{-0.9}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
in
i
rim
i_{\mathrm{rim}}
(Tables
4
&
3
). There is also a potential bias in
PA
rim
\mathrm{PA_{rim}}
of
−
5.2
−
1.6
+
3.2
∘
-5.2^{+3.2}_{-1.6}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
. These do not affect the main results presented in Sect.
5.3.2
: the brightness enhancement is significantly shifted towards the rim’s projected major axis. The radial and azimuthal brightness profiles are well-recovered (Fig.
10
).
HR 4049:
we find potential biases of
2.3
−
0.7
+
0.7
​
mas
2.3^{+0.7}_{-0.7}\,\mathrm{mas}
in
θ
rim
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}
and
−
9
−
3
+
3
∘
-9^{+3}_{-3}\mathrm{{}^{\circ}}
in
i
rim
i_{\mathrm{rim}}
(Tables
4
&
3
). These do not significantly affect the main results presented in Sect.
5.3.5
: the brightness enhancement is significantly shifted towards the rim’s projected major axis. Aside from a minor amount of flux leakage in the central cavity drawing the radial brightness profile slightly inward, the radial and azimuthal brightness profiles are recovered (Fig.
10
).
IRAS 15469-5311:
we find potential biases of
0.96
−
0.08
+
0.09
​
mas
0.96^{+0.09}_{-0.08}\,\mathrm{mas}
in
θ
rim
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}
and
−
5.4
−
0.6
+
1.1
-5.4^{+1.1}_{-0.6}
in
i
rim
i_{\mathrm{rim}}
(Tables
4
&
3
). These do not significantly affect the main results presented in Sect.
5.3.6
: the brightness profile is mostly symmetric around rim’s projected minor axis, with no other robust brightness enhancements detected. The radial and azimuthal brightness profiles are recovered (Fig.
10
).
PS Gem:
we find a potential bias of
2.1
−
0.8
+
0.9
​
mas
2.1^{+0.9}_{-0.8}\,\mathrm{mas}
in
θ
rim
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}
(Tables
4
&
3
). The reconstruction shows some pixelation and dirty beam artefacts, especially in faint flux regions (Fig.
9
), causing a bump in the tail of the reconstructed radial brightness profile (Fig.
10
). The trend of the radial and azimuthal profiles are otherwise both well-recovered (Fig.
9
). This does not significantly affect the main results presented in Sect.
5.3.8
: PS Gem’s image in Fig.
4
is most likely marred by the strong flux leakage from the primary, and it is thus excluded from the discussion on potential substructures.
In general, the only bias relative to the geometrical models that seems common to all systems is a positive bias of
∼
1
−
2
​
mas
\sim\!1\!-\!2\,\mathrm{mas}
is the rim diameter and a negative bias of several degrees in inclination (though always
≲
10
∘
\lesssim 10^{\circ}
in magnitude). This is a natural result of the infinitely sharp rim assumed in the geometric models, which when viewed at the interferometer’s angular resolution results in a slightly radially outwards shifted peak flux. The rim fitting routine targets this peak flux to derive
θ
rim
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}
. It also slightly blurs the apparent ellipticity of the rim, lowering the apparent inclination. It should be noted that the biases are only of concern if the true inner rims are indeed sharp and wall-like. At least for inner rims set by sublimation physics, there is reason to suspect that this is not the case (see the discussion at the end of Sect.
6.1.1
).
Figure 9
:
PMOIRED images of Fig.
8
, convolved by a Gaussian to match the imaging resolution (left-hand images), versus their reconstruction from synthetic datasets (right-hand images). White solid lines indicate the elliptical aperture following the rim orientation used to calculate the azimuthal brightness profiles. The rim orientation is taken from Table
2
for the PMOIRED images, and from Table
4
(i.e. derived from the images following Sect.
5.1
) for their reconstructions. These rims are displayed in dot-dashed cyan. All other symbols analogous to Figs.
3
&
4
.
.
Figure 10
:
Peak-normalized radial and azimuthal brightness profiles of the convolved model images (red dashed) and synthetic reconstructions (blue with
1
​
σ
1\sigma
contours) in Fig.
9
. Red bars indicate the size of the azimuthally averaged interferometric beam (for the radial profiles) and the
PA
\mathrm{PA}
it subtends at the reconstruction’s rim (for the azimuthal profiles).
Table 4
:
SPARCO and image-derived rim parameters of the synthetic PMOIRED data reconstructions.
Target
f
prim
,
0
f_{\mathrm{prim,0}}
UD
prim
\mathrm{UD_{prim}}
f
sec
,
0
f_{\mathrm{sec,0}}
d
rim
d_{\mathrm{rim}}
θ
rim
\theta_{\mathrm{rim}}
i
rim
i_{\mathrm{rim}}
PA
rim
\mathrm{PA}_{\mathrm{rim}}
Δ
​
α
rim
\Delta\alpha_{\mathrm{rim}}
Δ
​
δ
rim
\Delta\delta_{\mathrm{rim}}
r
hl
r_{\mathrm{hl}}
(
%
)
(\%)
(
mas
)
\mathrm{(mas)}
(
%
)
\mathrm{(\%)}
(
mas
)
(\mathrm{mas})
(
∘
)
(^{\circ})
(
∘
)
(^{\circ})
(
mas
)
(\mathrm{mas})
(
mas
)
(\mathrm{mas})
(
mas
)
(\mathrm{mas})
AI Sco
67.1
67.1
–
5.49
5.49
0.64
0.64
5.8
−
0.4
+
0.5
5.8^{+0.5}_{-0.4}
42
−
8
+
6
42^{+6}_{-8}
56
−
5
+
6
56^{+6}_{-5}
−
0.35
−
0.14
+
0.11
-0.35^{+0.11}_{-0.14}
−
1.72
−
0.20
+
0.17
-1.72^{+0.17}_{-0.20}
3.23
−
0.12
+
0.12
3.23^{+0.12}_{-0.12}
EN TrA
72.1
72.1
–
4.99
4.99
0.30
0.30
6.50
−
0.16
+
0.20
6.50^{+0.20}_{-0.16}
52
−
2
+
2
52^{+2}_{-2}
30
−
5
+
4
30^{+4}_{-5}
−
1.04
−
0.04
+
0.04
-1.04^{+0.04}_{-0.04}
−
0.94
−
0.13
+
0.11
-0.94^{+0.11}_{-0.13}
3.86
−
0.13
+
0.13
3.86^{+0.13}_{-0.13}
HD 95767
47.4
47.4
–
22.08
22.08
1.91
1.91
5.66
−
0.05
+
0.06
5.66^{+0.06}_{-0.05}
20
−
3
+
3
20^{+3}_{-3}
21
−
6
+
3
21^{+3}_{-6}
0.02
−
0.03
+
0.03
0.02^{+0.03}_{-0.03}
−
0.61
−
0.03
+
0.03
-0.61^{+0.03}_{-0.03}
3.43
−
0.13
+
0.13
3.43^{+0.13}_{-0.13}
HD 108015
56.7
56.7
–
–
1.29
1.29
6.31
−
0.06
+
0.06
6.31^{+0.06}_{-0.06}
26.3
−
0.9
+
1.6
26.3^{+1.6}_{-0.9}
77.3
−
1.7
+
3.2
77.3^{+3.2}_{-1.7}
−
0.57
−
0.03
+
0.03
-0.57^{+0.03}_{-0.03}
0.47
−
0.04
+
0.04
0.47^{+0.04}_{-0.04}
3.62
−
0.16
+
0.16
3.62^{+0.16}_{-0.16}
HR 4049
65.5
65.5
0.74
0.74
0.30
0.30
2.40
2.40
16.6
−
0.7
+
0.7
16.6^{+0.7}_{-0.7}
48
−
3
+
3
48^{+3}_{-3}
85
−
5
+
5
85^{+5}_{-5}
−
1.1
−
0.3
+
0.3
-1.1^{+0.3}_{-0.3}
−
0.78
−
0.17
+
0.17
-0.78^{+0.17}_{-0.17}
16
−
2
+
2
16^{+2}_{-2}
IRAS 15469-5311
52.7
52.7
–
–
2.04
2.04
8.76
−
0.08
+
0.09
8.76^{+0.09}_{-0.08}
34.8
−
0.6
+
1.1
34.8^{+1.1}_{-0.6}
52
−
4
+
5
52^{+5}_{-4}
0.38
−
0.06
+
0.06
0.38^{+0.06}_{-0.06}
−
0.30
−
0.05
+
0.05
-0.30^{+0.05}_{-0.05}
5.30
−
0.14
+
0.29
5.30^{+0.29}_{-0.14}
PS Gem
89.1
89.1
0.44
0.44
–
0.67
0.67
10.5
−
0.8
+
0.9
10.5^{+0.9}_{-0.8}
36
−
8
+
8
36^{+8}_{-8}
151
−
8
+
11
151^{+11}_{-8}
−
0.1
−
0.3
+
0.3
-0.1^{+0.3}_{-0.3}
0.0
−
0.4
+
0.5
0.0^{+0.5}_{-0.4}
9.8
−
1.1
+
0.9
9.8^{+0.9}_{-1.1}
Appendix C
Effect of regularisation weight on ORGANIC reconstructions
Figure 11
:
Illustration of the effect of different values for the
regularisation weight
μ
\mu
. The interferometric beam size is given in the
lower-right corner. All other symbols are analogous to Fig.
3
.
In this appendix, we investigate the effect of the
regularisation weight
μ
\mu
on the ORGANIC images.
The total reconstruction loss
in ORGANIC utilises the score output of the GAN discriminator evaluated on
the generated image,
s
^
img
\hat{s}_{\mathrm{img}}
, as a regularisation term (via
ℒ
reg
=
−
ln
⁡
s
^
img
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{reg}}\!=\!-\ln{\hat{s}_{\mathrm{img}}}
). Its aim is to
make the imaged rims look more like the RT model training data. In this
section, however, we show that most of the regulatory properties of
ORGANIC are not caused by the numerical weight of
ℒ
reg
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{reg}}
in the total reconstruction loss (Eq.
4
),
but are instead inherent to the CNN architecture itself, as well as the initial
training of the generator’s convolutional kernel weights.
Fig.
11
shows example ORGANIC images for AI Sco
and EN TrA at various values of the regularisation weight
μ
\mu
(using the same parameters as in Table
3
). Higher
μ
\mu
generally leads to slightly less pixelation, radially sharper rims and more sharply defined azimuthal brightness modulations (though over-regularisation tends to occur for
μ
≳
1
\mu\!\gtrsim\!1
, making the rim too sharp, as seen for EN TrA). Nevertheless,
the recovered structures are highly similar, especially on the scale
of the interferometric beam. This holds even for
μ
=
0.001
\mu\!=\!0.001
, which
renders the numerical weight of
ℒ
reg
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{reg}}
negligible.
At very low
μ
\mu
values, most differences are likely stochastic in
nature, induced by the random initialisations of the latent noise vector
and the Monte Carlo dropout layers in ORGANIC
(Claes et al.,
2020
)
.
ORGANIC clearly possesses an implicit regularisation floor.
A similar implicit regularisation was noticed and utilised by the PIRATES
12
12
12
https://github.com/SAIL-Labs/PIRATES
image reconstruction framework of
Lilley et al. (
2026
)
. The authors presented a
CNN which is applied directly on polarimetric masking interferometry data from
the VAMPIRES instrument
(Lucas et al.,
2024
)
. In a first initial training
step, the convolutional kernel weights of the network are trained to map
from a set of VAMPIRES observables to a cube of images in Stokes
(
I
,
Q
,
U
)
(I,Q,U)
space. The training set for this step consists of sets of Stokes scattered
light image cubes for various dusty geometries and their corresponding VAMPIRES
observables, modelled using the MCFOST
13
13
13
https://github.com/cpinte/mcfost
RT code
(Pinte et al.,
2006
,
2009
)
. This forces the CNN kernels to learn
the scattering-induced, physically meaningful spatio-polarimetric
relationships between images of different Stokes components. At reconstruction
time, when faced with an arbitrary set of VAMPIRES observables, the initially
trained CNN directly maps to a corresponding
(
I
,
Q
,
U
)
(I,Q,U)
image cube. In a
second step, this resulting initial image cube is refined by an iterative fitting
routine. The initially trained kernel weights of the CNN are trained
further in order to match the predicted interferometric observables, calculated
from the CNN-generated image, to those actually observed. The generated image
cube at the end of this procedure is taken as the final reconstruction.
This results in well-regularised
(
I
,
Q
,
U
)
(I,Q,U)
images which provide a good
match to the data, but also retain the scattering-induced connections between different
Stokes components.
The iterative fitting routine in PIRATES is highly similar to ORGANIC’s reconstruction
algorithm. The ORGANIC reconstruction routine also updates the initially
trained generator kernel weights in order to make the generated image
match a set of interferometric data. The main difference between the two is
that PIRATES acts directly on VAMPIRES observables, while ORGANIC acts on
a latent noise space (allowing for reconstruction at arbitrary
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage,
but inducing an additional source of uncertainty; Sect.
4.3.1
).
At no point does PIRATES include an explicit
ℒ
reg
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{reg}}
term in its reconstruction. Instead, it relies fully on the general
inductive bias imparted by CNN architectures
(such as locality and
weight-sharing, e.g. Wang & Wu,
2023
; Ulyanov et al.,
2020
)
– a property shared by other
types architectures, such as neural fields, when applied to similar ill-posed
inverse reconstruction problems
(e.g. Levis et al.,
2024
)
– as well as the
initial training. The latter pre-emptively forces the weights into a subspace which
generates images similar to the training data.
Together with the limited effect of
μ
\mu
in ORGANIC, this shows that most
of ORGANIC’s regulatory properties share similar origins. They are
implicitly imposed by the generator’s CNN architecture and the initial
training phase, not by the numerical weight of
ℒ
reg
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{reg}}
in the total loss.
The standard GAN architecture of ORGANIC precludes us from determining
μ
\mu
through the conventional L-curve method (e.g.
Renard et al.
2011
; see Appendix
D
for a description). This is due to the use of the discriminator score output in
ℒ
reg
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{reg}}
. The discriminator score estimates the Jensen-Shannon divergence between the image during reconstruction and the RT training set
(Goodfellow et al.,
2014
)
. This is a good distance measure during the initial phases of the image reconstruction, and does guide towards more regularised final images (as seen from Fig.
11
). However, as the reconstruction progresses and the similarity between the image and training set decrease, the Jensen-Shannon divergence saturates to similar values and becomes uninformative as a measure
(Arjovsky & Bottou,
2017
)
. This can be addressed in future ORGANIC designs by using a Wasserstein GAN, where the discriminator instead produces an actively calculated estimate of the Wasserstein distance
(Arjovsky et al.,
2017
)
. When used as the regularisation loss
ℒ
reg
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{reg}}
, this Wasserstein estimate would remain an informative measure between the reconstructed image and the RT training set at all times. Since this would require an architectural overhaul of ORGANIC, this is currently beyond the scope of this work.
We performed initial investigations of the image morphologies for all targets under varying
μ
\mu
within a reasonable range (
μ
=
0.1
​
–
​
2
\mu=0.1\text{--}2
). The main recovered features do not vary significantly under varying
μ
\mu
. As it generally provided a good balance between suppression of noisy features and avoiding over-regularisation for our PIONIER datasets, we fixed
μ
=
0.2
\mu=0.2
for the final ORGANIC reconstructions in this article (Figs.
3
&
4
).
Appendix D
SQUEEZE reconstructions
As further validation of our ORGANIC image reconstruction procedure (Sect.
4.3
),
we additionally performed image reconstructions on our targets using the SQUEEZE
14
14
14
https://github.com/fabienbaron/squeeze
package
(Baron et al.,
2010
)
. SQUEEZE uses a more classical minimisation
engine and set of regularisations. We used SQUUEZE’s implementation of SPARCO for a binary star (called
modelcode_binary_bwsmearing
internally).
We then performed reconstructions using the same imaging and SPARCO
parameters as in Table
3
. SQUEEZE uses an annealed MCMC
routine with Metropolis-Hastings steps in order to minimise the loss, and
includes various classical regularisation functions. The annealing scheme is
intended to encourage convergence to the global minimum compared to more prevalent
gradient-descent-based methods. Starting from different random images and using total variation (TV) regularisation – which tends to produce piece-wise flat images
(Thiébaut & Young,
2017
)
– we ran 5 parallel MCMC chains for 2000 steps. Annealing generally converged after
∼
100
\sim\!100
.
The mean of the final 200 images of each chain was then taken as the final
image. The regularisation weight
μ
\mu
was set through the L-curve method
(e.g. Renard et al.,
2011
)
. This method consists of performing reconstructions for different values of
μ
\mu
, with the resulting plot of
ℒ
data
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{data}}
versus
ℒ
reg
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{reg}}
showing an L-like curve. This curve represents a transition regime between dominance of one loss term over the other. The optimal
μ
\mu
value is chosen in the knee of this curve.
The resulting SQUEEZE images are shown in Fig.
12
.
To provide a more quantitative assessment of the similarity between the ORGANIC and SQUEEZE reconstructions, we also provide radial (following Sect.
5.1
) and azimuthal (following Sect.
B.1
) brightness profiles. These are calculated using elliptical apertures following the rim orientations given in Table
3
. The profiles are displayed in Fig.
13
. We find the following for each of our targets:
AI Sco:
Both methods agree on the general shape of the radial and azimuthal profile. The SQUEEZE image’s TV regularisation does tend to produce a slightly broader radial profile and less pronounced azimuthal brightness depression of the disc flux close to the primary’s position (though this depression is likely partially an artefact of the
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage; Sect.
B.1
). This is due to the tendency of TV to prefer broad, piece-wise flux plateaus and heavy punishment of flux gradients between pixels within those plateaus
(e.g. Rudin et al.,
1992
)
.
EN TrA:
Both methods agree well on the azimuthal profile. As for AI Sco, the TV regularisation of the SQUEEZE image tends to produce a slightly broader radial profile.
HD 95767:
Both methods agree well on the radial profile. The ORGANIC azimuthal profile, while sharing its main features with the SQUEEZE profile, is generally choppier, and unphysical broadening of the rim causes a secondary azimuthal brightness spike at
PA
∼
120
∘
\mathrm{PA\sim 120^{\circ}}
. This choppy nature is likely caused by dirty beam artefacts (see Sect.
F.2
). The TV regularisation more heavily punishes these features, resulting in a smoother azimmuthal profile.
HD 108015:
Both methods agree well on both the radial and azimuthal profile. The exact azimuthal position of the brightness enhancement of the rim differs by
∼
10
∘
\sim\!10^{\circ}
in
PA
\mathrm{PA}
, and the enhancement is slightly broader for the ORGANIC image. Nevertheless, this does not significantly affect the main results presented in Sect.
5.3.2
: the brightness enhancement is significantly shifted towards the rim’s projected major axis.
IRAS 15469-5311:
Both methods agree well on the radial profile. The azimuthal profiles also match in main features, indicating a rim mostly symmetric along its projected minor axis with no other strong brightness enhancements of note. The TV regularisation of the SQUEEZE image does discourage narrow flux features surrounded by pixels of little flux, resulting in a deeper flux depression along the darkest part of the rim.
IW Car:
Both methods agree on the general features of the radial and azimuthal profiles for both the inner and outer arcs. However, there are mismatches in the specifics of the azimuthal profiles, such as the brightness of the inner arcs’ southeastern sector. This indicates that the specifics of the azimuthal profiles for IW Car are not entirely well-constrained, and should be treated with caution. This nevertheless does not affect the main results presented in Sect.
5.3.7
: both inner arcs and a large outer arc are retrieved in the morphology.
Figure 12
:
Comparison between our final ORGANIC reconstructions (left-hand images; Figs.
3
&
4
) and the alternative SQUEEZE reconstructions (right-hand images). The TV regularisation weight
μ
TV
\mu_{\mathrm{TV}}
is displayed for each SQUEEZE reconstruction. White solid lines indicate the elliptical aperture used to calculate the azimuthal brightness profiles. In dot-dashed cyan, we display the rim fits derived from the ORGANIC images (Table
3
), whose orientation is used to define the azimuthal profile aperture. Note that for IW Car’s outer arc, the elliptical aperture is centred on
(
Δ
​
α
rim
,
Δ
​
δ
rim
)
(\mathrm{\Delta\alpha_{rim}},\mathrm{\Delta\delta_{rim}})
of the rim fit to the inner arcs. This is so the inner arcs can be properly masked out when calculating the outer arc’s azimuthal profile. The
PA
\mathrm{PA}
of the azimuthal profile and the centre of the radial profile are thus also defined from this point. All other symbols analogous to Fig.
3
.
Figure 13
:
Peak-normalized radial and azimuthal brightness profiles of the ORGANIC (solid blue) and SQUEEZE (dashed red) image reconstructions displayed in Fig.
12
. Both types of images are displayed with their
1
​
σ
1\sigma
significance contours. Red bars indicate the size of the azimuthally averaged interferometric beam (for the radial profiles) and the
PA
\mathrm{PA}
it subtends at the reconstruction’s rim (for the azimuthal profiles).
Appendix E
Selected data
The
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverages and observables of the selected PIONIER observations are shown in Figs.
1
&
14
. Corresponding observation logs are available online on
Zenodo
.
Squared visibilities
Closure phases
Figure 14
:
Selected
V
​
2
V2
and
ϕ
​
3
\phi 3
data from the INSPIRING PIONIER
observations of our targets, shown in blue. For comparison, the observables
synthesised from the final SPARCO+ORGANIC image reconstructions (Figs.
3
&
4
) are overlaid as red dots.
Appendix F
Image robustness against
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage artefacts
In this appendix, we assess the robustness of our ORGANIC image reconstructions (Figs.
3
&
4
) against any dirty beam artefacts potentially induced by the sparse
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage of our observations. Such artefacts are often characteristic of optical interferometry due to the low number of telescopes used, and if left unidentified, can significantly bias the interpretation of recovered image features.
F.1
Dirty beams
The sparse
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage in optical interferometry can be the cause of non-physical artefacts in the reconstructed images, which have no basis in the actual object’s intensity distribution. These artefacts are caused by secondary lobes in the interferometric point spread function, also called the dirty beam. The dirty beam is calculated using the inverse direct Fourier transform, assuming a point source frequency response (i.e. a visibility of unity) at the sampled
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
points and zero visibility elsewhere. In Fig.
15
, we show the dirty beams corresponding to our target’s
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverages (Fig.
1
). The centre of the dirty beam consists of an elliptical Gaussian-like peak called the primary beam. The centre of this peak is called the interferometric beam size – with a short side is of size
∼
λ
min
/
(
2
​
B
max
)
\sim\lambda_{\mathrm{min}}/(2B_{\mathrm{max}})
, with
λ
min
\lambda_{\mathrm{min}}
the shortest wavelength and
B
max
B_{\mathrm{max}}
the longest baseline – and defines the formal resolution element of the observations. Further away from the primary beam, one can see multiple other features (even negative flux features, which can cause subtraction effects), called secondary lobes, which are the cause of reconstruction artefacts. In the following, we will apply a test which can help identify such artefacts in our final ORGANIC reconstructions.
Figure 15
:
Dirty beams of the observations. Calculated using the sampled
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverages in Fig.
1
. Central ellipses denote the interferometric
beam (short side of size
∼
λ
min
/
(
2
​
B
max
)
\sim\lambda_{\mathrm{min}}/(2B_{\mathrm{max}})
).
F.2
Identifying potential beam-induced artefacts
In Sect.
5
, we extensively discuss the general features detected in the ORGANIC images. To characterise the robustness of these features against dirty beam artefacts, we performed a simulation test using a mirrored version of the final ORGANIC images
(similar to e.g. Planquart et al.,
2024
)
. We extracted synthetic
V
​
2
V2
and
ϕ
​
3
\phi 3
observables from horizontally mirrored versions of the final ORGANIC images (Figs.
3
&
4
), using the same
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage (Fig.
1
), imaging and SPARCO parameters (Table
3
), and observable uncertainties (Fig.
14
). Following the procedure outlined in Sect.
4.3.1
, we then performed image reconstruction with ORGANIC on these synthetic observables. This procedure is equivalent to taking the final ORGANIC image as a ’model’, and seeing how reliable the features of this model are recovered under reconstruction with a mirrored
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage. Any general features (brightness enhancements, flux arcs, etc.) that retain their integrity in the resulting mirror reconstructions – taking into account that the reconstruction induces additional blurring and stretching in the direction of the primary beam – are highly robust against changes in
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage and hence dirty beam artefacts. Features that disappear are not reliable, as they are highly sensitive to the specifics of the
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage, and hence likely affected by dirty beam artefacts.
Figure 16
:
Mirrored final ORGANIC images (left-hand side) and their simulated image reconstructions from synthetic data (right-hand side). The displayed rim fits are mirrored versions of those derived from the ORGANIC images (Table
3
). All symbols are otherwise analogous to Fig.
3
.
We find the following for each of our targets:
AI Sco.
We recover the expected strong brightness enhancement close to the primary star, shifted towards the projected rim’s major axis.
EN TrA.
We recover the expected strong brightness enhancement near the position of the binary star, shifted towards the projected rim’s major axis.
HD 95767.
The azimuthal brightness enhancement along the inner rim in the original image is heavily smeared out, and its contrast with the rest of the inner rim is heavily reduced. This indicates it is highly sensitive to the specifics of the
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage. Similarly, the central bar of emission crossing the inner rim cavity is not recovered, indicating it is an artefact induced by the dirty beam. In fact, HD 95765 seems to be the most sensitive to dirty beam artefacts out of all targets. A likely culprit is the exceptionally high secondary flux fraction –
f
sec
∼
25
%
f_{\mathrm{sec}}\!\sim\!25\%
, while
f
sec
≲
5
%
f_{\mathrm{sec}}\lesssim 5\%
for the others (Table
3
). This causes significant degeneracy between the secondary and the rim’s azimuthal intensity profile with respect to the
ϕ
​
3
\phi 3
data. Slight over- or underestimations in the secondary’s SPARCO parameters can then cause significant dirty beam artefacts, despite the otherwise excellent
(
u
,
v
)
(u,v)
coverage (Fig.
1
). The reconstructed mirror rim also widens substantially. While this is partly to be expected due to the mirror reconstruction introducing additional smearing, the effect is stronger than in the other targets, indicating that the excessive thinness of the rim at certain positions in the original image is unreliable. Due to these complications, reliable constraints on the rim morphology of HD 95767 will have to be derived from interferometric observations in longer wavelength bands (e.g. with VLTI/MATISSE), where the central stars’ flux contributions are more diminished.
HD 108015.
We recover the strong brightness enhancement shifted towards the projected rim’s major axis. The small amount of flux found inside the cavity close to the darkest spot along the rim (where the intensity approaches zero) is not recovered. Similarly, the dark spot is filled in. These two features are most probably dirty beam artefacts.
HR 4049.
The strong brightness enhancement shifted toward the rim’s major axis is recovered. The deep drop in brightness in the south-western part of the original image (south-eastern in the mirrored image) is partially filled in, indicating it was slightly affected by dirty beam artefacts. Similarly, a non-negligible amount of flux is pulled interior of the rim into the cavity in the mirror reconstruction, showing that the small amounts of flux found interior of the rim in the original image are unreliable.
IRAS 15469-5311.
The generally smooth profile IRAS 15469-5311, largely symmetrically distributed around the rim’s minor axis, is recovered.
IW Car.
Both the large outer arc as well as the inner arcs closer to the central binary are generally recovered, indicating their robustness. The lower-significance flux feature immediately south of the secondary star is, however, not recovered, marking it as a potential artefact.
PS Gem.
The general ’choppiness’ of the rim has disappeared, and instead we recover a smoothed, smeared out version of the mirrored image. This is due to the fact that that the secondary lobes of PS Gem are relatively anti-symmetric under horizontal mirroring (Fig.
15
). As a result, the choppy nature of the original reconstruction caused by dirty beam artefacts is mostly cancelled out by similar artefacts of the mirrored dirty beam. Interestingly, the bright spot towards the north-west in the original image (noth-east in the mirrored image) is recovered up to a slight loss in contrast. Nevertheless, given that the imaged rim in general is heavily affected by artefacts (Sect.
5.3.8
), we err on the side of caution, and do not consider it to be a reliable feature.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA