Investigating simple target-covariate relationships for Chronos-2 and TabPFN-TS
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
2
Experimental Evaluation
Settings.
Results for the identity experiment.
Results for the sum experiment.
Results for the aggregate experiment.
Results for the quadratic experiment.
Auto-regressive experiment
3
Conclusions
References
A
Experimental protocol
Datasets.
Setting.
Embeddings of
TabPFN
.
B
Experiment with auto-regressive term
Settings.
Results.
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2605.12200v1 [cs.LG] 12 May 2026
Investigating simple target-covariate relationships for
Chronos-2
and
TabPFN-TS
Gaspard Berthelier   , Mariia Baranova
1
1
footnotemark:
1
, Andrei-Tiberiu Pantea,
Etienne Le Naour, Adrien Petralia, Tahar Nabil
EDF R&D, Palaiseau
{gaspard.berthelier,mariia.baranova,andrei.pantea}@edf.fr
{etienne.le-naour,tahar.nabil,adrien.petralia}@edf.fr
Equal contribution.Inria Sophia-Antipolis, Université Côte d’Azur.Université Paris Cité.
Themis Palpanas
Université Paris Cité
themis@mi.parisdescartes.fr
Abstract
Time Series Foundation Models (TSFMs) have recently achieved state-of-the-art performance, often outperforming supervised models in zero-shot settings.
Recent TSFM architectures, such as
Chronos-2
and
TabPFN-TS
, aim to integrate covariates. In this paper, we design controlled experiments based on simple target–covariate relationships to assess this integration capability. Our results show that
TabPFN-TS
captures these relationships more effectively than
Chronos-2
, especially for short horizons, suggesting that the strong benchmark performance of
Chronos-2
does not automatically translate into optimal modeling of simple covariate–target dependencies.
1
Introduction
Time Series Foundation Models (TSFMs) enable inference-only forecasting leveraging massive pretraining on large-scale real-world and synthetic datasets. Extensive evaluations in
GiftEval
(Aksu
et al.
,
2024
)
show that TSFMs outperform supervised deep learning baselines on univariate forecasting tasks from various domains.
However, in real-world applications, univariate forecasting is often insufficient, and effectively leveraging dynamic covariates becomes essential, particularly in domains such as energy or retail.
The first generation of TSFMs
(Das
et al.
,
2024
; Ansari
et al.
,
2024
)
lacked native covariate handling, with the exception of
MOIRAI
(Woo
et al.
,
2024
)
which was superseded by
MOIRAI 2.0
for improved univariate performance
(Liu
et al.
,
2025
)
.
More recently,
Chronos-2
(Ansari
et al.
,
2025
)
and
TabPFN-TS
(Hoo
et al.
,
2025
)
have shown impressive results on covariate-based forecasting, as reflected by
fev-bench
(Shchur
et al.
,
2025
)
.
To handle covariate integration,
Chronos-2
uses time and group attention layers to facilitate information exchange across multiple time series and is pretrained on synthetic multivariate data.
In contrast,
TabPFN
(Hollmann
et al.
,
2022
)
is a tabular foundation model pretrained on millions of synthetic regression tasks, which can be adapted for time series forecasting with carefully designed features
(Hoo
et al.
,
2025
)
. Both models leverage in-context learning to capture feature–target relationships on unseen problems.
Despite
Chronos-2
’s strong performance in recent bencharks (e.g.
fev-bench
), these evaluations offer limited insight into actual covariate usage.
In this paper, we investigate how effectively these two models leverage covariate information, focusing on cases where the relationship between the target and covariates follows simple patterns. Our experimental results show that
TabPFN-TS
more reliably captures simple target–covariate relationships
particularly for short forecasting horizons. These results suggest that, despite
Chronos-2
’s dominance on large-scale covariate-based forecasting benchmarks,
there is still significant potential to design TSFMs that more effectively leverage covariates.
2
Experimental Evaluation
In the following experiments, we compare
Chronos-2
and
TabPFN-TS
on minimal tasks designed to isolate target and covariate dependency. We compare the two models on a range of real-world datasets and forecasting settings, as well as on synthetically generated time series.
Settings.
We consider the usual time series forecasting setting, where models take as input a target’s past look-back window of size
L
L
, to forecast a future horizon window of size
H
H
. Additionally, covariates can be included as inputs, throughout the full context (look-back and horizon). We build four different experiments:
(i)
Identity: the covariate equals the target to forecast; performed on real-world time series.
(ii)
Sum: the target is
Z
=
X
+
Y
Z=X+Y
, with
X
X
and
Y
Y
synthetically generated time series.
(iii)
Aggregate: the target is an aggregate of the form
Z
=
X
+
Y
−
Z
2
Z=\sqrt{X}+Y-Z^{2}
, where
X
,
Y
,
Z
X,Y,Z
are real-world time series.
(iv)
Quadratic: the target is of the form
Z
=
a
+
b
​
X
+
c
​
Y
2
Z=a+bX+cY^{2}
, with
X
X
and
Y
Y
synthetically generated time series. More details on the experiment protocols are provided in Appendix
A
.
Results for the identity experiment.
Table
1
, reports the errors of each model when the target is also given as a covariate.
We observe that (i) while
Chronos-2
is a stronger univariate forecaster,
TabPFN-TS
consistently outperforms it in this experiment; (ii) despite being given access to the ground truth, both models still suffer from very short context lengths.
Table 1:
Normalized MSEs for
Chronos-2
and
TabPFN-TS
before and after providing the target as covariate (+id), on real-world datasets and a range of
L
−
H
L-H
settings.
Dataset
Setting
Chronos-2
Chronos-2
(+id)
TabPFN-TS
TabPFN-TS
(+id)
Electricity
1344-336
0.2037
0.0085
0.2367
0.0056
672-168
0.1788
0.0130
0.2149
0.0205
168-24
0.1953
0.0477
0.2662
0.0415
24-24
1.3718
1.0252
2.1728
0.8121
Solar
1344-336
0.1503
0.0456
0.2421
0.0000
672-168
0.1831
0.0612
0.1925
0.0000
168-24
0.1272
0.0886
0.1434
0.0000
24-24
1.3238
0.8333
1.8876
0.3565
Traffic
1344-336
0.2326
0.0276
0.2893
0.0037
672-168
0.2158
0.0251
0.2550
0.0051
168-24
0.1926
0.0561
0.4007
0.0034
24-24
1.7487
1.5570
3.1238
1.1547
Results for the sum experiment.
Figure
1
reports the relative performance of each model for the sum experiment, across both synthetic datasets.
TabPFN-TS
outperforms
Chronos-2
on short forecasting horizons and achieves comparable performance in several other settings. We hypothesize that
TabPFN-TS
performs better on short horizons because input and output features will be more similarly distributed, resulting in a task that more closely resembles the i.i.d problems encountered during pretraining.
Figure 1:
Heatmaps of the relative performance of
Chronos-2
(C) compared to
TabPFN-TS
(T) for the sum experiment, expressed as
100
∗
(
T
−
C
)
/
C
100*(T-C)/C
).
Blue
indicates
TabPFN-TS
outperforms
Chronos-2
, and
red
indicates
Chronos-2
outperforms
TabPFN-TS
. Left: Random Walk dataset, Right: KernelSynth dataset.
Results for the aggregate experiment.
Table
2
, reports the errors of each model before and after providing the covariates. Similarly to the identity experiment, we observe that
Chronos-2
is a stronger univariate forecaster, but
TabPFN-TS
better captures the simple covariate-target relationship. Interestingly, removing the time embeddings and using only covariate features (
TabPFN
(cov) model) does not significantly degrade the performance, and becomes the most efficient model in the short-range setting.
Table 2:
Normalized MSEs for
Chronos-2
and
TabPFN-TS
before and after providing covariates (cov).
TabPFN
(+cov) corresponds to
TabPFN-TS
(+cov) without the time embeddings.
Setting
Chronos-2
Chronos-2
(+cov)
TabPFN-TS
TabPFN-TS
(+cov)
TabPFN
(cov)
1344-336
0.1880
0.1940
0.2375
0.0008
0.0013
672-168
0.1860
0.1905
0.2106
0.0013
0.0020
168-24
0.1861
0.1999
0.3608
0.0010
0.0011
24-24
0.5580
0.5625
1.6802
0.1160
0.0950
Results for the quadratic experiment.
Figure
2
reports the results for the quadratric experiment. Once again,
TabPFN-TS
outperforms
Chronos-2
on the majority of settings, and particularly for short forecasting horizons.
Figure 2:
Heatmaps of the relative performance of
Chronos-2
(C) compared to
TabPFN-TS
(T) for the quadratic experiment, expressed as
100
∗
(
T
−
C
)
/
C
100*(T-C)/C
).
Blue
indicates
TabPFN-TS
outperforms
Chronos-2
, and
red
indicates
Chronos-2
outperforms
TabPFN-TS
. Left: Random Walk dataset, Right: KernelSynth dataset.
Auto-regressive experiment
Additionally to the previous experiments, we ran an experiment with a target
Z
=
a
+
b
​
X
t
+
c
​
Y
t
2
+
ϕ
​
Z
t
−
1
Z=a+bX_{t}+cY_{t}^{2}+\phi Z_{t-1}
. Results are included in Appendix
B
.
By progressively increasing
ϕ
\phi
, we increase the importance of time-dependence over the target-covariates relationship, which enables
Chronos-2
to better perform against
TabPFN-TS
. This suggests that the relative performance of both models depends on the relative importance of the time-to-target and covariate-to-target relationships for a given task.
3
Conclusions
In this paper, we investigated how
Chronos-2
and
TabPFN-TS
leverage covariate information to improve forecasting performance, by evaluating their performance on simple target-covariates tasks. Although
Chronos-2
achieves stronger performance on large-scale benchmarks such as
fev-bench
, our experiments show that
TabPFN-TS
demonstrates superior results on our simple synthetic experiments, especially for short forecasting horizons. We hypothesize that this advantage stems from its pretraining based on expressive prior and extensive synthetic regression problems.
This conclusion highlights a promising direction for future research in the development of TSFMs. In particular, a foundation architecture that combines explicit temporal dependency modeling, as in
Chronos-2
, with in-context regression capabilities inspired by
TabPFN-TS
, could represent an interesting direction for covariate-aware time series foundation models.
Acknowledgments
Supported by EDF R&D. Mariia Baranova, Adrien Petralia and Themis Palpanas are also supported by EU Horizon project DataGEMS (
101188416
101188416
), and by
Y
​
Π
​
A
​
I
​
Θ
​
A
Y\Pi AI\Theta A
& NextGenerationEU project HARSH (
Y
​
Π
​
3
​
T
​
A
−
0560901
Y\Pi 3TA-0560901
) that is
carried out within the framework of the National Recovery and Resilience
Plan “Greece 2.0” with funding from the European Union –
NextGenerationEU.
References
T. Aksu, G. Woo, J. Liu, X. Liu, C. Liu, S. Savarese, C. Xiong, and D. Sahoo (2024)
Gift-eval: a benchmark for general time series forecasting model evaluation
.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10393
.
Cited by:
§1
.
A. F. Ansari, O. Shchur, J. Küken, A. Auer, B. Han, P. Mercado, S. S. Rangapuram, H. Shen, L. Stella, X. Zhang,
et al.
(2025)
Chronos-2: from univariate to universal forecasting
.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15821
.
Cited by:
Appendix A
,
§1
.
A. F. Ansari, L. Stella, A. C. Türkmen, X. Zhang, P. Mercado, H. Shen, O. Shchur, S. S. Rangapuram, S. Pineda-Arango, S. Kapoor, J. Zschiegner, D. C. Maddix, H. Wang, M. W. Mahoney, K. Torkkola, A. G. Wilson, M. Bohlke-Schneider, and B. Wang (2024)
Chronos: learning the language of time series
.
Trans. Mach. Learn. Res.
.
Cited by:
§1
.
C. Chen, K. Petty, A. Skabardonis, P. Varaiya, and Z. Jia (2001)
Freeway performance measurement system: mining efficiency
.
Transportation Research Record
1748
(
1
),
pp. 20–28
.
Cited by:
Appendix A
.
A. Das, W. Kong, R. Sen, and Y. Zhou (2024)
A decoder-only foundation model for time-series forecasting
.
In
Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024,
Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024
,
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research
.
Cited by:
§1
.
N. Hollmann, S. Müller, K. Eggensperger, and F. Hutter (2022)
TabPFN: a transformer that solves small tabular classification problems in a second
.
In
The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations
,
Cited by:
§1
.
S. B. Hoo, S. Müller, D. Salinas, and F. Hutter (2025)
From tables to time: how tabpfn-v2 outperforms specialized time series forecasting models
.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.02945
.
Cited by:
Appendix A
,
§1
.
G. Lai, W. Chang, Y. Yang, and H. Liu (2018)
Modeling long- and short-term temporal patterns with deep neural networks
.
In
Proceedings of the 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval
,
SIGIR ’18
,
New York, NY, USA
,
pp. 95–104
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
Appendix A
.
C. Liu, T. Aksu, J. Liu, X. Liu, H. Yan, Q. Pham, S. Savarese, D. Sahoo, C. Xiong, and J. Li (2025)
Moirai 2.0: when less is more for time series forecasting
.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.11698
.
Cited by:
§1
.
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (2006)
Solar power data for integration studies
.
Note:
Accessed: 2026-02-13
External Links:
Link
Cited by:
Appendix A
.
O. Shchur, A. F. Ansari, C. Turkmen, L. Stella, N. Erickson, P. Guerron, M. Bohlke-Schneider, and Y. Wang (2025)
Fev-bench: a realistic benchmark for time series forecasting
.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26468
.
Cited by:
§1
.
A. Trindade (2015)
ElectricityLoadDiagrams20112014 Data Set
.
Note:
UCI Machine Learning Repository
External Links:
Link
Cited by:
Appendix A
.
G. Woo, C. Liu, A. Kumar, C. Xiong, S. Savarese, and D. Sahoo (2024)
Unified training of universal time series forecasting transformers
.
In
Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning
,
Cited by:
§1
.
Appendix A
Experimental protocol
Datasets.
We consider three real-world datasets covering domains of energy, transport and climate:
Electricity
(Trindade,
2015
)
,
Traffic
(Chen
et al.
,
2001
)
,
(Lai
et al.
,
2018
)
and
Solar
(National Renewable Energy Laboratory,
2006
)
.
Solar
and
Electricity
are aggregated hourly (sum) and a dozen of users with many missing values are removed from
Electricity
. For the sum and quadratic experiments, we generate two synthetic datasets: one with the KernelSynth method, which was used to pretrain
Chronos-2
(Ansari
et al.
,
2025
)
, and the latter with a random walk process. For the aggregate experiment, we manually build a
Conso
dataset:
Conso
=
Traffic
+
Electricity
−
Solar
2
\text{Conso}=\sqrt{\text{Traffic}}+\text{Electricity}-\text{Solar}^{2}
(one time series for each user). For the quadratic experiment, the target is
Z
=
5
+
10
​
X
+
20
​
Y
2
Z=5+10X+20Y^{2}
.
Setting.
We consider the usual look-back window to horizon forecasting setting, with varying look-back
L
L
and horizon
H
H
window sizes:
f
:
x
∈
ℝ
L
↦
y
^
∈
ℝ
H
f:x\in\mathbb{R}^{L}\mapsto\hat{y}\in\mathbb{R}^{H}
Optionally, covariates
c
∈
ℝ
L
+
H
c\in\mathbb{R}^{L+H}
can be included as inputs.
Our metric for evaluation is the normalized MSE, which corresponds to the MSE computed on predictions and ground-truths, normalized
by instance
. That is:
L
f
​
(
x
,
y
)
=
‖
y
^
−
y
~
‖
2
2
,
with
y
^
=
f
​
(
x
~
)
,
x
~
=
x
−
μ
x
σ
x
,
y
~
=
y
−
μ
x
σ
x
.
L_{f}(x,y)=||\hat{y}-\tilde{y}||_{2}^{2}\,,\quad\textrm{with}\quad\hat{y}=f(\tilde{x}),\;\tilde{x}=\frac{x-\mu_{x}}{\sigma_{x}},\;\tilde{y}=\frac{y-\mu_{x}}{\sigma_{x}}.
During evaluation, and for all
L
−
H
L-H
settings, we apply a stride of 512 to obtain non overlapping and non periodic windows. We evaluate deterministically over those windows and for all individuals.
Embeddings of
TabPFN
.
Inspired by
TabPFN-TS
(Hoo
et al.
,
2025
)
, we encode time indices for
TabPFN
with periodic time embeddings:
ϕ
​
(
t
∈
[
0
,
L
+
H
]
)
=
(
t
L
,
cos
⁡
(
2
​
π
​
t
T
i
)
,
sin
⁡
(
2
​
π
​
t
T
i
)
,
…
)
T
i
∈
{Chosen periods}
\phi(t\in[0,L+H])=\left(\frac{t}{L},\cos\left(2\pi\frac{t}{T_{i}}\right),\sin\left(2\pi\frac{t}{T_{i}}\right),\dots\right)\quad T_{i}\in\text{\{Chosen periods\}}
We use daily (
T
=
24
T=24
) and weekly (
T
=
168
T=168
) periods for our real-world datasets, since all are hourly and are expected to follow these periods. This corresponds to
5
5
time index features. When covariates are available as context, we encode them as features as well. When this is the case, we may remove the time embeddings. In our experiments with synthetic covariates, we observed better results without time embeddings, using only covariates used as features. Thus,
TabPFN-TS
from the synthetic experiments (results on Figure
1
and Figure
2
) does not include time embeddings, and is consequently identical to the original
TabPFN
.
Appendix B
Experiment with auto-regressive term
In complement to the quadratic experiment (Paragraph
2
), the following experiment investigates the effect of introducing temporal dependence into a nonlinear regression task.
Settings.
The target variable is generated according to
Z
t
=
a
+
b
​
X
t
+
c
​
Y
t
2
+
ϕ
​
Z
t
−
1
Z_{t}=a+bX_{t}+cY_{t}^{2}+\phi Z_{t-1}
, where
X
t
X_{t}
and
Y
t
Y_{t}
are synthetically generated time series and
a
,
b
,
c
a,b,c
are fixed coefficients, as in the quadratic experiment (See Appendix
A
). The auto-regressive coefficient
ϕ
\phi
is taken in the range
{
0
,
0.2
,
0.4
,
0.6
,
0.8
}
\{0,0.2,0.4,0.6,0.8\}
, allowing a smooth transition from a purely instantaneous nonlinear relationship (
ϕ
=
0
\phi=0
) to a temporally dependent process.
Results.
Figures
3
and
4
showcase that as
ϕ
\phi
increases, the task transitions from a purely nonlinear tabular regression setting, where
TabPFN-TS
performs best
, to a temporally dependent forecasting problem in which
Chronos-2
increasingly outperforms
TabPFN-TS
by exploiting the growing temporal structure. This suggests that the relative performance of both models depends on the relative importance of the time-to-target and covariate-to-target relationships for a given task.
(a)
ϕ
=
0
\phi=0
(b)
ϕ
=
0.2
\phi=0.2
(c)
ϕ
=
0.4
\phi=0.4
(d)
ϕ
=
0.6
\phi=0.6
(e)
ϕ
=
0.8
\phi=0.8
(f)
ϕ
=
1
\phi=1
Figure 3:
Heatmaps showing the relative performance of
Chronos-2
(C) compared to
TabPFN-TS
(T), expressed as
100
∗
(
T
−
C
)
/
C
100*(T-C)/C
), across context lengths and horizons for different values of
ϕ
\phi
on the KernelSynth dataset.
Blue
regions indicate cases where
TabPFN-TS
outperforms
Chronos-2
, while
red
regions indicate the opposite.
(a)
ϕ
=
0
\phi=0
(b)
ϕ
=
0.2
\phi=0.2
(c)
ϕ
=
0.4
\phi=0.4
(d)
ϕ
=
0.6
\phi=0.6
(e)
ϕ
=
0.8
\phi=0.8
(f)
ϕ
=
1
\phi=1
Figure 4:
Heatmaps showing the relative performance of
Chronos-2
(C) compared to
TabPFN-TS
(T), expressed as
100
∗
(
T
−
C
)
/
C
100*(T-C)/C
), across context lengths and horizons for different values of
ϕ
\phi
on the Random Walk dataset.
Blue
regions indicate cases where
TabPFN-TS
outperforms
Chronos-2
, while
red
regions indicate the opposite.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA