Towards precision cosmology with Void × CMB correlations (II)
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
2
Simulated datasets
2.1
Galaxy and void mock catalogs
2.2
CMB
κ
\kappa
maps
3
Observable: ELG-traced voids and CMB lensing convergence maps
3.1
Voids traced by ELGs
3.2
CMB lensing convergence
κ
\kappa
4
Methodology
4.1
Estimating the
κ
\kappa
profiles
4.2
Estimating associated errors
4.3
The signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio
4.4
Methodological considerations
5
Results
5.1
Impact of mock catalogs on void
×
\times
CMB
κ
\rm\kappa
signal
5.1.1
Total sample
5.1.2
Splitting by type
5.1.3
Signal-to-noise ratios
5.1.4
Rescale vs Not rescale
5.1.5
Mock systematics and cosmological implications
5.2
Forecast
5.2.1
Signal optimization
5.2.2
Forecast across instrumental noise levels
6
Conclusions
Stability of the Void
×
\times
CMB lensing signal to mock catalog features.
Forecasts for the
Roman
telescope using the best mock catalog case.
7
Acknowledgements
References
A
Comparison of void catalogs
B
Void
×
\times
CMB
κ
\kappa
with instrumental noise
C
Void
×
\times
CMB
κ
\kappa
with several radius cuts
D
Void
×
\times
CMB
κ
\kappa
signal for the non-rescaled methodology
E
Forecast table
F
AGORA peculiar velocities
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2605.22630v1 [astro-ph.CO] 21 May 2026
1
1
institutetext:
Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias, Calle Vía Láctea s/n, E-38205, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
2
2
institutetext:
Departamento de Astrofísica, Universidad de La Laguna, E-38206, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
3
3
institutetext:
MTA–CSFK Lendület “Momentum” Large-Scale Structure (LSS) Research Group, Konkoly Thege Miklós út 15-17, H-1121 Budapest, Hungary
4
4
institutetext:
Konkoly Observatory, HUN-REN Research Centre for Astronomy and Earth Sciences, Budapest, Hungary
5
5
institutetext:
CPPM, Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS/IN2P3, Marseille, France
6
6
institutetext:
Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Peyton Hall, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
7
7
institutetext:
IPAC, California Institute of Technology, Mail Code 314-6, 1200 E. California Blvd., Pasadena, CA 91125
Towards precision cosmology with Void
×
\times
CMB correlations (II)
Impact of mock catalogs on the Void
×
\times
CMB lensing signal.
Mar Pérez Sar
perezsarmar@gmail.com
Carlos Hernández Monteagudo
András Kovács
Alice Pisani
Yun Wang
(Received xxx, 2024; accepted xxx, 2024)
Gravitational lensing by large-scale structure imprints secondary anisotropies on the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) that can be exploited to probe cosmology. In particular, cosmic voids produce a characteristic lensing signature detectable through Void
×
\times
CMB cross-correlations. This signal has been robustly measured in the past but its cosmological constraining power remains limited by the incomplete knowledge of how methodological choices affect its measurement and by its uncertain dependence on cosmological parameters. Using a set of validated
Roman
mock catalogs, we first quantify how mock construction impacts the measured signal and then forecast the capabilities of
Roman
, in combination with current and upcoming CMB surveys such as
Planck
, SO and CMB-S4-like experiments. We analyze the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) for different void definitions (2D and 3D), stacking approaches (rescaled versus non-rescaled profiles), CMB map filtering schemes and noise levels.
In contrast to galaxy and void statistics, we find that the Void
×
\times
CMB lensing signal is less sensitive to the choice of mock catalog, indicating that future tensions with data are unlikely to stem from mock inaccuracies alone. The highest S/N is achieved for 2D voids with rescaled profiles. We forecast S/N
≈
\approx
13
σ
\sigma
(8
σ
\sigma
) for 2D (3D)
Roman
voids combined with
Planck
, increasing to 22
σ
\sigma
(13
σ
\sigma
) for SO and 31
σ
\sigma
(18
σ
\sigma
) for CMB-S4-like surveys. For comparison, current
Planck
-based measurements reach S/N
≈
\approx
17
σ
\sigma
for 3D DESI Legacy Survey LRG voids and 5.9
σ
\sigma
for 2D DES Year 3 voids, both covering substantially larger areas than
Roman
(
∼
\sim
2000 deg
2
).
While the cosmological dependence of this observable remains to be quantified,
Roman
together with next-generation of LSS and CMB surveys opens a path toward the first direct cosmological constraints from Void
×
\times
CMB lensing.
Key Words.:
Cosmology: large-scale structure - Cosmic microwave background - Gravitational lensing - Galaxy surveys - Cosmic voids
\nolinenumbers
1
Introduction
Figure 1
:
Review of prior work on Void
×
\times
CMB lensing cross-correlations. The figure presents the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) achieved and the value of the parameter
A
κ
\rm A_{\kappa}
which quantifies the agreement between the observed signal and cosmological simulations. Unfilled circles denote results from 2D voids and filled circles from 3D voids. A ‘T’ symbol inside a point indicates a tension with theoretical expectations for some configuration.
In 1978, the same year the Nobel Committee for Physics recognized the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) as the first compelling evidence for the Big Bang model
(Gamow,
1946
,
1948
; Alpher
et al.
,
1948
; Alpher and Herman,
1948
; Penzias and Wilson,
1965
)
, two independent studies
(Jõeveer
et al.
,
1978
; Gregory and Thompson,
1978
)
reported the first observational hints of cosmic voids, starting to uncover the ”cellular pattern” now identified as the cosmic web within the large-scale structure (LSS). Nearly fifty years later, the CMB and LSS have become the two foundational pillars of modern cosmology and constitute unique probes to test the dynamics and contents of our Universe through its cosmic history
(Dodelson,
2003
; Peebles,
2020
)
.
The cosmological information within the CMB is primarily encoded in its angular anisotropies—tiny fluctuations at the level of
∼
10
−
5
​
K
\sim 10^{-5}\penalty 10000\ \mathrm{K}
superimposed on the uniform background of the most perfect blackbody ever measured (
T
CMB
=
2.72548
±
0.00057
​
K
T_{\mathrm{CMB}}=2.72548\pm 0.00057\penalty 10000\ \mathrm{K}
,
Smoot
et al.
1992
; Bennett
et al.
1993
). The anisotropies represent the seeds that would later grow into the cosmic web and are classified into two types: primary and secondary anisotropies. Primary anisotropies originate at the surface of last scattering (
z
∼
1100
z\sim 1100
) and reflect the physical processes at play in the early Universe, mainly the oscillation of the photon–baryon plasma in the evolving dark matter potential wells and the Thomson scattering keeping both components bound until recombination. Secondary anisotropies arise from interactions of the resultant CMB photons with the intervening large-scale structures through gravitational and scattering processes. Gravitational effects includes lensing, i.e, the deflection of CMB photons due to spatially varying gravitational potentials
(Lewis and Challinor,
2006
)
and the Integrated Sachs–Wolfe (ISW) effect, i.e, the change of CMB photon energies due to time-varying gravitational potentials
(Sachs and Wolfe,
1967
)
. Scattering effects originate from interactions of the CMB photons with the baryonic matter of the LSS, including the kinetic and thermal Sunyaev–Zel’dovich effects (kSZ and tSZ, respectively)
(Sunyaev and Zeldovich,
1980
,
1972
)
, Rayleigh scattering by neutral hydrogen
(Basu
et al.
,
2004
; Lewis,
2013
)
, and fine-structure transitions in metals and ions
(Basu
et al.
,
2004
; Hernández-Monteagudo
et al.
,
2006
,
2007
)
.
Precision mapping of these anisotropies by COBE
(Smoot
et al.
,
1992
)
, WMAP
(Bennett
et al.
,
2003
; Spergel
et al.
,
2003
)
, and
Planck
(Planck Collaboration
et al.
,
2014
,
2016
,
2020
)
has enabled constraints at percent level on key cosmological parameters—including the baryonic and dark matter physical densities, and the amplitude and slope of the primordial power spectrum. Ground-based telescopes like the Atacama Cosmology Telescope (ACT,
Das
et al.
2011
; Sherwin
et al.
2017
) and the South Pole Telescope (SPT,
Story
et al.
2015
; Wu
et al.
2019
) have refined these measurements and upcoming ones such as the Simons Observatory (SO,
Ade
et al.
2019
)
promise even higher accuracy.
At late times, the three-dimensional distribution of galaxies also carries cosmological information about the initial conditions of the Universe and its later evolution. Through the galaxy–halo connection, galaxies trace the underlying matter field with a certain bias, outlining the filamentary structure of the cosmic web. In this context, the study of cosmic voids has evolved significantly since their initial discovery. Thanks to their underdense nature, voids are less affected by the complex, non-linear processes that dominate overdense regions, making them particularly clean environments for probing cosmic expansion and dark energy
(Biswas
et al.
,
2010
; Bos
et al.
,
2012
; Pisani
et al.
,
2015
; Pollina
et al.
,
2016
)
, the properties of dark matter
(Reed
et al.
,
2015
; Baldi and Villaescusa-Navarro,
2018
; Arcari
et al.
,
2022
)
, modified theories of gravity
(Cai
et al.
,
2015
; Barreira
et al.
,
2015
; Cautun
et al.
,
2018
)
and the presence of massive neutrinos
(Massara
et al.
,
2015
; Kreisch
et al.
,
2019
; Bayer
et al.
,
2021
)
. Their quiet interiors also shelter some of the most isolated galaxies, making them powerful laboratories for studying how environment shapes galaxy formation and evolution
(Benson
et al.
,
2003
; Kreckel
et al.
,
2012
; Habouzit
et al.
,
2020
)
. The primary void observables are the void size function
(Sheth and van de Weygaert,
2004
; Furlanetto and Piran,
2006
; Jennings
et al.
,
2013
; Pisani
et al.
,
2015
; Ronconi and Marulli,
2017
; Contarini
et al.
,
2019
,
2023
; Verza
et al.
,
2019
,
2024b
,
2024a
; Fernández-García
et al.
,
2025
)
and the void-galaxy cross-correlation function (with its distortions in redshift space)
(Kaiser,
1987
; Alcock and Paczynski,
1979
; Lavaux and Wandelt,
2012
; Hamaus
et al.
,
2015
; Nadathur
et al.
,
2019
; Aubert
et al.
,
2022
; Correa
et al.
,
2022
; Hamaus
et al.
,
2022
; Radinović
et al.
,
2023
; Degni
et al.
,
2025
)
, which currently provide the tightest and most mature constraints from underdense regions.
Historically, cosmic voids have been treated as a byproduct of galaxy surveys and investigated mainly in wide-area datasets such as SDSS
(York
et al.
,
2000
; Abazajian
et al.
,
2009
)
, VIPERS
(Guzzo
et al.
,
2014
)
, Pan-STARRS
(Kaiser
et al.
,
2000
)
, BOSS
(Dawson
et al.
,
2013
)
, and DES
(Flaugher,
2005
; Dark Energy Survey Collaboration
et al.
,
2016
; Abbott
et al.
,
2022
)
. Because of the multiscale nature of voids, which span tens to hundreds of megaparsecs, the ideal void survey would benefit from the combination of: large contiguous sky coverage to capture the rare, cosmologically sensitive large voids; dense galaxy sampling to resolve small-scale structures within voids; and preferably spectroscopic redshifts to minimize uncertainties in void–galaxy correlations. Moreover, a broad redshift coverage is also essential to track the evolution of void observables across cosmic time, which are particularly sensitive to dark energy and modified gravity—an aspect of growing importance given recent DESI hints of evolving dark energy
(Abdul Karim
et al.
,
2025
)
. Projects such as the Wide-field Spectroscopic Telescope
(WST, Mainieri
et al.
,
2024
)
and the Stage-5 Spectroscopic Experiment
(Spec-S5, Besuner
et al.
,
2025
)
aim to meet these demanding requirements but they remain long-term prospects. In the near future, significant progress will come from the synergy among modern surveys—DESI
(DESI Collaboration
et al.
,
2016
)
,
Euclid
(Laureijs
et al.
,
2011
)
, SPHEREx
(Doré
et al.
,
2014
)
, PFS
(Takada
et al.
,
2014
)
, LSST
(Ivezić
et al.
,
2019
)
, and the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope
(Spergel
et al.
,
2015
)
which offer complementary perspectives and help mitigating systematic effects. In this work, the focus will be on
Roman
(
1
≤
z
≤
3
1\leq z\leq 3
), whose deep, high-resolution imaging and dense tracer sampling opens a new regime for void studies. Compared with
Euclid
and DESI,
Roman
combines finer angular detail with higher spectroscopic tracer density, which permits precise mapping of void structures at smaller scales.
The study of voids is not isolated from that of the CMB. Early Void
×
\times
CMB intensity cross-correlation studies focused on the ISW effect, with
Granett
et al.
(
2008
)
reporting an anomalously strong signal by stacking supervoids and superclusters. While this result, in tension with
Λ
\Lambda
CDM, sparked extensive follow-up efforts
(Pápai
et al.
,
2011
; Nadathur
et al.
,
2012
; Flender
et al.
,
2013
; Ilić
et al.
,
2013
; Hernández-Monteagudo and Smith,
2013
; Aiola
et al.
,
2015
; Hotchkiss
et al.
,
2015
; Granett
et al.
,
2015
; Cai
et al.
,
2017b
; Kovács,
2018
; Kovács
et al.
,
2019
; Dong
et al.
,
2021
; Hang
et al.
,
2021b
; Hansen
et al.
,
2025
)
, it motivated a natural progression toward CMB lensing convergence (
κ
\kappa
) maps, which offers a higher-significance and complementary probe. Subsequent studies focused on detecting this signal by stacking lensing maps on the angular position of thousands of voids, achieving significances from 3 to 17
σ
\sigma
in recent years
(Cai
et al.
,
2017a
; Chantavat
et al.
,
2016
; Raghunathan
et al.
,
2020b
; Vielzeuf
et al.
,
2021b
; Hang
et al.
,
2021a
; Kovács
et al.
,
2022
; Vielzeuf
et al.
,
2023b
; Camacho-Ciurana
et al.
,
2024
; Demirbozan
et al.
,
2024
; Sartori
et al.
,
2025
)
.
Despite these successes, several challenges have prevented Void
×
\times
CMB lensing from becoming a primary tool for cosmological parameter constraints.
The main obstacle is the lack of an analytical model for the observable. The only theoretical framework was proposed by
Chantavat
et al.
(
2016
,
2017
)
and relies on ideal conditions (multiple voids aligned along the line of sight). The rest of observational works dealing with real data and its complexities often aim to detect the signal and confirm its consistency with the
Λ
\Lambda
CDM model through a template-fitting method built upon the output of N-body cosmological simulations. This process involves comparing the observed signal to that derived from simulations by measuring one dimensional parameter
A
κ
=
A
data
/
A
model
\rm A_{\kappa}=A_{data}/A_{model}
, which quantifies the amplitude required for the simulated convergence profile to match the observed lensing signal. In the absence of systematic differences between the data and the simulations
A
κ
\rm A_{\kappa}
is expected to be
compatible with unity.
Deviations from unity have been reported in the literature, indicating mild tensions with the
Λ
\Lambda
CDM expectation up to 3
σ
\sigma
(Vielzeuf
et al.
,
2021b
; Hang
et al.
,
2021a
; Kovács
et al.
,
2022
; Camacho-Ciurana
et al.
,
2024
)
(see Figure
1
for a compilation of Void
×
\times
CMB lensing analysis). Yet it remains unclear whether these discrepancies arise from genuine physical effects or from methodological artifacts introduced by the mock catalogs, void definitions, sample selection, or other aspects of the analysis.
If such discrepancies hint at new physics, understanding them would require a detailed characterization of how the void lensing profile varies with cosmological parameters. This task is still limited by the scarcity of high-resolution, multi-cosmology simulations that coherently model both CMB and LSS observables. In general, simulations with CMB companions are already limited (e.g., Websky
Stein
et al.
,
2020
,
Agora
Omori
,
2024
, HalfDome
Bayer
et al.
,
2025
), and most only model the standard
Λ
\Lambda
CDM cosmology
1
1
1
Some exceptions are DEMNUni
(Castorina
et al.
,
2015
; Carbone
et al.
,
2016
)
and the Gower Street simulations
(Jeffrey
et al.
,
2025
)
but they lack the required resolution for the
Roman
sample.
. This means that we can only compare observations to a very limited number of simulated scenarios, and typically only for the standard
Λ
\Lambda
CDM cosmology. At the same time, methodological choices can also impact the measured signal, an aspect that has never been systematically quantified.
In this paper we focus on the latter point. We analyze how different mock catalogs and analysis choices affect the Void
×
\times
CMB lensing profiles and their signal-to-noise ratios, while simultaneously forecasting the expected signal for the
Roman
Space Telescope in combination with
Planck
, Simons Observatory (SO), and CMB-S4–like experiments
(Abazajian
et al.
,
2016
)
.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sect.
2
we briefly describe the simulated datasets used for this work. Then, in Sect.
3
, we introduce the observable of interest. Section
4
presents the methodology. Section
5
contains the results and discussions and Sect.
6
the conclusions.
2
Simulated datasets
2.1
Galaxy and void mock catalogs
This work is conducted in the context of the Nancy Grace
Roman
Space Telescope
(Spergel
et al.
,
2015
; Observations Time Allocation Committee and Community Survey Definition Committees,
2025
)
.
Roman
is a NASA observatory scheduled for launch in late 2026, featuring a 2.4 m primary mirror—same as the Hubble Space Telescope—but with a field of view 100 times larger (
0.28
0.28
deg
2
) that will enable rapid, wide-area observations. The instrument combines visible/near-infrared imaging (0.48–2.3
μ
\mu
m) with slitless near-infrared spectroscopy (1.0–1.93
μ
\mu
m) to target cosmology, exoplanets, and infrared astrophysics. Its High Latitude Wide Area Survey (HLWAS) will map large-scale structure over
∼
\sim
5100 deg
2
, with spectroscopy covering
∼
\sim
2415 deg
2
in its medium and deep tiers. The survey is expected to measure redshifts for roughly 14.2 million H
α
\alpha
, 3.6 million [OIII], and 1.3 million [OII] emission-line galaxies (ELGs) at
1
≲
z
≲
2.5
1\lesssim z\lesssim 2.5
, producing a 3D map of the matter distribution about three times denser than that of
Euclid
at
z
=
1.5
z=1.5
.
All our datasets come from the
Agora
simulation
2
2
2
https://yomori.github.io/Agora/index.html
(Omori,
2024
)
, which provides a full-sky halo lightcone with self-consistent CMB secondary anisotropies maps (CMB lensing, tSZ/kSZ, CIB). In a companion paper
(Pérez Sar
et al.
,
2025
)
we describe how we rely on
Agora
to build the mock galaxy and void catalogs employed here. As a summary, we use the
Roman
mock catalog of
Zhai
et al.
(
2021
)
as a reference
3
3
3
We note that this catalog differs from what the Roman Time Allocation Committee (ROTAC) has recommended
(Observations Time Allocation Committee and Community Survey Definition Committees,
2025
)
: it’s 20
%
\%
smaller in survey area (2000 vs. 2400 deg
2
), and deeper (10
-16
vs. 1.5
⋅
10
−
16
\cdot 10^{-16}
erg/s/cm
2
). However, they are sufficiently similar for the present analysis.
and generate a suite of
Roman
-like mocks for the
Agora
simulation
(Omori,
2024
)
through an
analog matching
algorithm. This algorithm links each
Roman
galaxy with the most similar
Agora
halo counterpart in a multidimensional parameter space that includes halo mass, environment and other galaxy attributes. With this procedure we generate four families of mock catalogs with different levels of specification:
-
N
N
(number only): matches
Roman
’s number density alone.
-
N
​
M
NM
(mass): matches number density and halo mass.
-
N
​
M
,
b
env
NM,b_{\rm env}
(mass + environment): additionally matches a local environment indicator defined as the density contrast in spheres of 5
h
−
1
h^{-1}
Mpc.
-
N
​
M
,
b
ELGs
NM,b_{\rm ELGs}
(mass + galaxy-type indicators): includes mass and galaxy-type proxies (stellar mass, specific star formation rate), most closely resembling the semi-analytic model (SAM) mapping.
Each family is generated using four different selections of the extended
Agora
halo catalog to test the impact of different initial biases on the algorithm. The four variants are:
-
M-all: halos ranked by stellar mass
-
M-ELGs: halos ranked by stellar mass, restricted to ELG-host halos.
-
R-all: halos selected randomly.
-
R-ELGs: halos selected randomly, restricted to ELG-host halos.
Combining the four families with the four tracer selections we produce sixteen mock catalogs which span a range of specifications and biases relative to the
Roman
ELG sample (See Appendix
A
, Figure
9
).
The void catalogs are constructed using both 3D and 2D void-finders. The 3D catalog is generated with
REVOLVER
4
4
4
https://github.com/seshnadathur/Revolver
(REal-space VOid Locations from surVEy Reconstruction), based on a modified version of the
ZOBOV
algorithm
(Neyrinck,
2008
)
. The 2D catalog is obtained as described in
Sánchez
et al.
(
2017
)
, adopting smoothing scales of
sm
VF
=
10
​
h
−
1
​
Mpc
{\rm sm_{VF}}=10\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}\penalty 10000\ \mathrm{Mpc}
and
sm
VF
=
5
​
h
−
1
​
Mpc
{\rm sm_{VF}}=5\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}\penalty 10000\ \mathrm{Mpc}
, and a slice thickness of
s
≈
70
​
h
−
1
​
Mpc
s\approx 70\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}\penalty 10000\ \mathrm{Mpc}
. Further details on the void finders and about the parameter choices can be found in
Pérez Sar
et al.
(
2025
)
. Figure
9
in the appendix summarizes the main properties of each void catalog.
Table 1
:
Summary of the main specifications of the LSS survey and CMB experiments considered in this work.
LSS survey
Duration
Final area
Wavelengths
[
μ
\mu
m]
Angular
resolution
[arcsec]
Detectors
Sensitivity
Roman
Space (L2)
2.4m mirror and two instruments:
1) Wide Field Instrument (WFI)
- For imaging: Filter wheel with 7
standard filters and 1 wide filter
(H-band)
- For spectroscopy: prism (R
∼
\sim
100)
for supernovae and other transients
science and grism (R
∼
\sim
435-865)
for the HLWAS.
2) Coronograph
2026-2031
∼
\sim
12% of the sky
∼
\sim
6% (spectroscopy)
Total HLWAS area:
5117 deg
2
- Deep tier: 19.2 deg
2
7 imaging bands
- Medium tier: 2415 deg
2
3 imaging bands + grism
- Wide Tier: 2702 deg
2
using H-band imaging only
Imaging 0.48–2.3
Spectroscopy 1.0–1.93
∼
\sim
0.1
18
5
σ
\sigma
point-source depth
of
≈
\approx
26.2 to 28.2 mag
(filter dependent)
CMB surveys
Duration
Final area
Frequency
(GHz)
and Bands
Angular
resolution
[arcmin]
Detectors
Sensitivity
(co-added)
[
μ
\mu
K
⋅
\cdot
arcmin]
Planck
Space (L2)
1.5 m mirror with 2 main instruments:
Low Frequency Instrument (LFI)
High Frequency Instrument (HFI)
2009 - 2013,
completed
full sky
30 - 850 (9 bands)
33 to 5
(freq.
dependent)
74
26 - 28
Simons
Observatory
(SO)
Ground (Cerro Toco, Chile)
1x5m Large Aperture Telescope (LAT)
3x0.5m Small Aperture Telescopes (SATs)
2025-2034,
ongoing
∼
\sim
61% of sky
27 - 280 (6 bands)
7.4 to 0.9
∼
\sim
60000
2.6 - 2.8
CMB-S4-like
Ground (South Pole + Chile)
Mutiple 6m LATs and 0.5m SATs
-
∼
\sim
70% of the sky
(Legacy Survey)
∼
\sim
3% (ultra deep)
∼
\sim
30 - 300 (11 bands)
30
(large scales)
1-1.5
(high res)
>500000
∼
\sim
1
2.2
CMB
κ
\kappa
maps
The CMB convergence (
κ
\kappa
) map is taken from
Agora
as well. Details on how this map is created can be found either on
Pérez Sar
et al.
,
2025
or
Omori
2024
. To simulate realistic survey conditions, we generate noise realizations from the noise power spectra of each CMB survey and add them to the noise-free
Agora
CMB
κ
\kappa
map.
We use
Planck
as the baseline for the current generation of experiments, while SO and a CMB-S4-like serve as future reference cases. All three fully overlap with the Roman footprint. Although the original CMB-S4 project is inactive, we still use a CMB-S4-like setup as an optimistic, ultra-low-noise reference.
Before the Voids
×
\times
CMB
κ
\kappa
cross-correlation, we pre-process the map by:
(i) degrading the HEALPix
5
5
5
HEALPix URL site:
https://healpix.sourceforge.io/
(Górski
et al.
,
2005
)
resolution from
N
side
=
8192
N_{\rm side}=8192
to
N
side
=
512
N_{\rm side}=512
, since the angular scales probed by voids are sufficiently large that a higher-resolution pixelization does not provide additional information;
(ii) scaling values by
10
3
10^{3}
for convenient units;
(iii) applying Gaussian smoothing when needed to reduce small-scale noise;
(iv) remove large-scale patterns introduced by incomplete sky coverage or anisotropic noise.
(v) masking the sky to match the 2000 deg
²
²
Roman
-like footprint.
The instrumental specifications for the LSS and CMB surveys used in this work are summarized in Table
1
.
3
Observable: ELG-traced voids and CMB lensing convergence maps
3.1
Voids traced by ELGs
Cosmic voids are not direct observables since their existence is inferred from the distribution of galaxies (or other tracers). Thus, any void catalog is a biased tracer of the underlying LSS. Their properties, including size, density profiles and number, depend not only on the specific void finding algorithm but also on the tracer’s number density, selection function, and bias.
In this work we use Emission Line Galaxies (ELGs) as tracers, following the
Roman
survey strategy. ELGs are galaxies characterized by strong emission lines from ionized gas, primarly arising from active star formation and, to a lesser extent, by active galactic nuclei (AGN)
(Gonzalez-Perez
et al.
,
2020
)
. Their optical and infrared nebular lines such as [OII] (
λ
\lambda
3726,
λ
\lambda
3729 Å), H
α
\alpha
(
λ
\mathrm{\lambda}
6563 Å) and [OIII] (
λ
\lambda
4959,
λ
\lambda
5007 Å) allow precise spectroscopy at
0.5
≲
z
≲
2
0.5\lesssim z\lesssim 2
(Drinkwater
et al.
,
2010
; Comparat
et al.
,
2013
)
. Because the line-strength hierarchy (H
α
\alpha
>
>
[OIII]
>
>
[OII]) governs redshift robustness,
Roman
relies on H
α
\alpha
and [OIII] for
1
<
z
<
2
1<z<2
, and on [OIII] and [OII] for
2
<
z
<
3
2<z<3
, while weaker emission features primarily contribute to interloper contamination through redshift misidentification.
Observations and models show that ELGs reside in lower-density environments compared to more massive tracers like Luminous Red Galaxies (LRGs). Specifically, ELGs are found primarily in filaments (
∼
\sim
50
%
\%
) and sheets (
∼
\sim
30
%
\%
). They typically inhabit lower-mass dark matter halos, with characteristic halo masses of order
M
h
∼
10
11.5
−
10
12
​
h
−
1
​
M
⊙
M_{\rm h}\sim 10^{11.5}-10^{12}\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}\rm{M_{\odot}}
. Furthermore, their halo occupation strongly depends on environment: centrals dominate in voids and sheets, while satellites become more common in filaments and knots (for ELG–halo connection studies see
Favole
et al.
(
2016
); Gonzalez-Perez
et al.
(
2020
); Hadzhiyska
et al.
(
2020
); Rocher
et al.
(
2023
); Yu
et al.
(
2024
); Yuan
et al.
(
2025
)
). Environmental and assembly bias effects, though generally weak for ELGs, should therefore be considered
(Gonzalez-Perez
et al.
,
2020
)
.
3.2
CMB lensing convergence
κ
\kappa
The CMB lensing convergence, denoted as
κ
\kappa
,
is related to the deflection angle
α
\alpha
experienced by CMB photons as they travel towards the observer from the last scattering surface at
z
∼
1100
z\sim 1100
. Under the Born approximation
6
6
6
The Born approximation assumes that the gravitational potential of the lens only causes a small perturbation to the light path, allowing us to treat it as a straight line.
it reads:
α
​
(
θ
)
=
∇
Ω
[
2
c
2
​
∫
0
χ
LS
𝑑
χ
​
χ
LS
−
χ
χ
LS
​
χ
​
Φ
​
(
χ
,
θ
)
]
≡
∇
Ω
ϕ
​
(
θ
)
,
\@vec{\alpha}(\@vec{\theta})=\nabla_{\Omega}\biggl[\frac{2}{c^{2}}\int_{0}^{\chi_{\rm LS}}d\chi\frac{\chi_{\rm LS}-\chi}{\chi_{\rm LS}\chi}\Phi(\chi,\@vec{\theta})\biggr]\equiv\nabla_{\Omega}\phi(\@vec{\theta}),
(1)
with
ϕ
\phi
is the lensing potential, defined as the projection of the 3D gravitational potential
Φ
\Phi
. The operator
∇
Ω
\nabla_{\Omega}
denotes the angular gradient on the unit sphere defined as
∇
Ω
=
θ
^
​
∂
∂
θ
+
φ
^
sin
⁡
θ
​
∂
∂
φ
\nabla_{\Omega}=\hat{\theta}\,\frac{\partial}{\partial\theta}+\frac{\hat{\varphi}}{\sin\theta}\,\frac{\partial}{\partial\varphi}
,
χ
\chi
denotes comoving distances, and
χ
LS
\chi_{\rm LS}
the distance to the CMB last scattering surface.
The CMB along direction
θ
\@vec{\theta}
is remapped to
θ
obs
≃
θ
+
∇
Ω
ϕ
​
(
θ
)
\@vec{\theta}^{\rm obs}\simeq\@vec{\theta}+\nabla_{\Omega}\phi(\@vec{\theta})
. The measurable lensing information resides in the spatial derivatives of
α
\alpha
, which describe how extended CMB regions are sheared and magnified. Inversion methods recover these derivatives through the magnification (Jacobian) matrix:
A
i
​
j
≡
∂
θ
i
obs
∂
θ
j
=
δ
i
​
j
+
∂
α
j
∂
θ
i
=
(
1
)
−
κ
−
γ
1
−
γ
2
+
ω
−
γ
2
−
ω
​
1
−
κ
+
γ
1
​
.
A_{ij}\equiv\frac{\partial\theta_{i}^{\rm obs}}{\partial\theta_{j}}=\delta_{ij}+\frac{\partial\alpha_{j}}{\partial\theta_{i}}=\pmatrix{1}-\kappa-\gamma_{1}&-\gamma_{2}+\omega\\
-\gamma_{2}-\omega&1-\kappa+\gamma_{1}.
(2)
This matrix decomposes into three components:
•
Convergence
κ
\kappa
: Isotropic magnification or demagnification of a sky patch. Positive convergence (
κ
>
0
\kappa>0
) occurs in overdense regions, slightly compressing the apparent angular scale of CMB fluctuations. Negative convergence (
κ
<
0
\kappa<0
) occurs in underdense regions (voids), slightly stretching the CMB patches.
•
Shear
γ
1
+
i
​
γ
2
\gamma_{1}+i\gamma_{2}
: Anisotropic streching of a circular sky patch into an elliptical one without changing the area.
•
Rotation
ω
\omega
: antisymmetric distortion corresponding to local rotations. In the Born approximation it cancels out.
Mathematically and still under the Born approximation, the convergence can be defined as half the (angular) Laplacian of the lensing potential:
κ
​
(
𝐧
^
)
=
1
2
​
Δ
Ω
​
ϕ
​
(
𝐧
^
)
=
1
c
2
​
∫
0
χ
LS
𝑑
χ
​
χ
LS
−
χ
χ
LS
​
χ
​
∇
Ω
2
Φ
​
(
χ
,
𝐧
^
)
\kappa(\hat{\mathbf{n}})=\frac{1}{2}\Delta_{\Omega}\phi(\hat{\mathbf{n}})=\frac{1}{c^{2}}\int_{0}^{\chi_{\rm LS}}d\chi\,\frac{\chi_{\rm LS}-\chi}{\chi_{\rm LS}\chi}\nabla_{\Omega}^{2}\Phi(\chi,\hat{\mathbf{n}})
≃
3
​
H
0
2
​
Ω
m
2
​
c
2
​
∫
0
χ
LS
𝑑
χ
​
χ
LS
−
χ
χ
LS
​
a
​
(
χ
)
​
χ
​
δ
​
(
χ
,
𝐧
^
)
.
\phantom{xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx}\simeq\,\frac{3H_{0}^{2}\Omega_{m}}{2c^{2}}\int_{0}^{\chi_{\rm LS}}d\chi\,\frac{\chi_{\rm LS}-\chi}{\chi_{\rm LS}a(\chi)}\,\chi\,\delta(\chi,\hat{\mathbf{n}}).
(3)
In the last equation we have used the Poisson equation in comoving units and converted the spatial Laplacian (
Δ
\Delta
) into the angular one (
Δ
Ω
\Delta_{\Omega}
) via the approximation
Δ
≃
1
/
χ
2
​
Δ
Ω
=
1
/
χ
2
​
∇
Ω
2
\Delta\simeq 1/\chi^{2}\Delta_{\Omega}=1/\chi^{2}\nabla_{\Omega}^{2}
:
∇
Ω
2
Φ
≃
χ
2
​
3
​
H
0
2
​
Ω
m
2
​
a
​
δ
,
\nabla_{\Omega}^{2}\Phi\simeq\chi^{2}\frac{3H_{0}^{2}\Omega_{m}}{2a}\delta,
(4)
where the line-of-sight contribution to the spatial Laplacian has been neglected,
a
​
(
χ
)
a(\chi)
denotes the cosmic scale factor,
δ
\delta
corresponds to the matter density contrast, and
H
0
H_{0}
and
Ω
m
\Omega_{m}
refer to the Hubble constant and the matter density parameter, respectively. According to Eq.
3
the convergence essentially maps the (distance-weighted) matter density contrast along the line of sight.
4
Methodology
The template-fitting method is the summary statistic commonly used to study the lensing imprint of voids
(Raghunathan
et al.
,
2020b
; Kovács
et al.
,
2022
; Sartori
et al.
,
2025
)
. This technique consists in extracting a
κ
\kappa
profile from simulations as a reference template and comparing it to the real observations.
The comparison is quantified by the amplitude parameter
A
κ
A_{\kappa}
, defined as the ratio between the observed and simulated CMB
κ
\kappa
profiles at common angular scales. Its signal-to-noise ratio,
S
/
N
=
A
κ
ML
/
σ
A
κ
\rm{S/N}=A_{\kappa}^{\rm ML}/\sigma_{A_{\kappa}}
, is obtained from the maximum-likelihood estimate
A
κ
ML
A_{\kappa}^{\rm ML}
and its uncertainty
σ
A
κ
\sigma_{A_{\kappa}}
, derived from the likelihood width.
The accuracy of the template fitting method depends on several factors like the assumed cosmology, and how closely the mock galaxies trace the spatial distribution of the real data. This effective 1-parameter
A
κ
A_{\rm\kappa}
fit, while a standard of the field, introduces a model dependence, potentially obscuring more complex or subtle deviations present in real data by compressing them into an overly simplistic representation. In this work, we do examine how different mock catalogs can influence the profiles used to compute
A
κ
A_{\rm\kappa}
; however revising the method is beyond the scope of this work.
4.1
Estimating the
κ
\kappa
profiles
Once we have our void catalog and the CMB
κ
\kappa
map we perform their cross-correlation. For this we stack the
κ
\kappa
signal at the positions of an ensemble of voids since the S/N of a single void is much smaller than unity
(Krause
et al.
,
2013
)
. This stacking can be done via two different approaches:
•
Profile-based
. For each void, we compute the radial
κ
\kappa
profile around its center in angular bins up to a maximum radius. We adopt either
θ
max
=
5
​
R
v
\theta_{\rm max}=5R_{v}
or
θ
max
=
5
∘
\theta_{\rm max}=5^{\circ}
. In the former case, profiles are rescaled by the void angular radius
R
v
R_{v}
before stacking; in the latter, no rescaling is applied.
•
Image-based
. We stack
κ
\kappa
map cutouts centered on each void, rescaled to a fixed grid of
200
×
200
200\times 200
pixels spanning
10
​
R
v
10R_{v}
. All cutouts are brought to this common scale by changing its resolution prior to stacking. Once we have the final image, we obtain the profile.
We then sum all profiles/patches and measure the average
κ
\kappa
signal in different concentric radius bins around the void centers. We use 25 bins of
Δ
=
0.2
\Delta=0.2
(in
r
/
R
v
r/R_{\mathrm{v}}
or degrees, depending on whether rescaling is applied). We note that, while the second approach offers a direct image of the signal, it is computationally demanding, especially for large void samples.
4.2
Estimating associated errors
We test the null hypothesis (i.e, the probability that the predicted signal is given by a random fluctuation) by stacking 1000 random CMB
κ
\kappa
realizations at the void positions. With this we aim to quantify the two main sources of noise that affect the void-lensing cross-correlation: i) the instrumental noise, and ii) the intrinsic noise of the
κ
\kappa
map. The latter is given by the contribution to the void
κ
\kappa
signal from structures (voids and clusters) that either lie along the line of sight or in the surroundings of the target voids, and are counted multiple times due to void overlapping. These contributions are orders of magnitude larger than the signal of interest, and this inevitably results in an intrinsic scatter on the
κ
\kappa
measurement.
We assume both components are Gaussian and model them through their angular power spectra. The random maps are generated with
healpy/synfast
at
N
side
=
512
N_{\rm side}=512
and
ℓ
max
=
3
​
N
side
−
1
\ell_{\rm max}=3N_{\rm side}-1
. The intrinsic
κ
\kappa
-noise component uses the power spectrum measured from the
Agora
κ
\kappa
map, while instrumental noise is added using the noise power spectra of each experiment. Both components are produced separately,
κ
random
=
κ
AGORA,random
+
κ
Inst Noise
\kappa_{\rm random}=\kappa^{\text{AGORA,random}}+\kappa^{\text{Inst Noise}}
, allowing us to switch them on or off and explore noise schemes ranging from noise-free (intrinsic scatter only) to realistic configurations including instrumental noise from
Planck
, SO, or CMB-S4-like surveys. Finally, we also apply the
Roman
mask to account for the sample variance associated to a finite sky coverage.
For each void, we store the
κ
\kappa
profile from the
Agora
lensing map and from all random realizations. In this way we can later study sub-samples of void populations under different observational configurations without recomputing the stacks.
Figure 2
:
Void
×
\times
CMB lensing profiles for the different mock catalogs. Columns correspond to different mock families; colors indicate tracer bias. The mean profile we use for comparison is computed as the average over the mocks that are consistent with the one- and two-point statistics of the
Roman
reference catalog. Residuals show deviations (in
σ
\sigma
) from the mean profile and are computed as the difference between each profile and the mean, normalized by the square root of their uncertainties.
4.3
The signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio
We estimate the signal-to-noise ratio using a likelihood approach to incorporate the full data vector and its covariance. Simpler estimators—such as the ratio of mean signal to mean noise or the peak anisotropy—neglect correlations between radial bins and the scale dependence of the noise. The process consist of maximizing the likelihood by fitting the observed profile
κ
OBS
\kappa^{\rm OBS}
to a simulated template
κ
SIM
\kappa^{\rm SIM}
. In this work, we do not have observed data but rather synthetic profiles from
Agora
, so we set
κ
OBS
\kappa^{\rm OBS}
=
κ
SIM
\kappa^{\rm SIM}
(corresponding to a maximum-likelihood amplitude of
A
κ
ML
=
1
A_{\kappa}^{\rm ML}=1
) and derived the expected S/N from the likelihood width. The width is quantified as the
68
%
68\%
confidence interval of the cumulative distribution (16th–84th percentiles), corresponding to
±
1
​
σ
\pm 1\sigma
for Gaussian-like posteriors
7
7
7
Given that our intrinsic
κ
\kappa
signal and noise mocks are Gaussian, the resulting PDF for
A
κ
A_{\kappa}
is also expected to be Gaussian.
.
The likelihood is defined as:
ℒ
​
(
A
κ
)
\displaystyle{\cal L}(A_{\kappa})
∝
\displaystyle\propto
exp
⁡
[
−
χ
2
​
(
A
κ
)
2
]
,
\displaystyle\exp{\biggl[\frac{-\chi^{2}(A_{\kappa})}{2}\biggr]},
(5)
χ
2
​
(
A
κ
)
\displaystyle{\chi}^{2}(A_{\kappa})
=
\displaystyle=
∑
i
​
j
(
κ
i
OBS
−
A
κ
⋅
κ
i
SIM
)
​
C
i
​
j
−
1
​
(
κ
j
OBS
−
A
κ
⋅
κ
j
SIM
)
,
\displaystyle\sum_{ij}\left(\kappa_{i}^{{\rm OBS}}-A_{\rm\kappa}\cdot\kappa_{i}^{\rm SIM}\right)C_{ij}^{-1}\left(\kappa_{j}^{{\rm OBS}}-A_{\rm\kappa}\cdot\kappa_{j}^{\rm SIM}\right),
(6)
with the
i
,
j
i,j
indexes running through angular bins and
C
i
​
j
C_{ij}
being the covariance matrix:
C
i
​
j
=
1
N
−
1
​
∑
n
N
(
κ
i
n
−
κ
¯
i
)
​
(
κ
j
n
−
κ
¯
j
)
,
C_{ij}=\frac{1}{N-1}\sum_{n}^{N}(\kappa_{i}^{n}-\bar{\kappa}_{i})(\kappa_{j}^{n}-\bar{\kappa}_{j})\,,
(7)
Here
N
=
1000
N=1000
is the number of random CMB-
κ
\kappa
realizations;
κ
i
n
\kappa_{i}^{n}
is the convergence in the
i
i
-th radial bin for the
n
n
-th realization, and
κ
¯
i
\bar{\kappa}_{i}
is the mean over all realizations. We correct the inverse covariance using the Hartlap factor
(Hartlap
et al.
,
2007
)
, given by
C
i
​
j
−
1
=
(
N
randoms
−
N
bins
−
1
)
/
(
N
randoms
−
1
)
​
⟨
C
i
​
j
−
1
⟩
C^{-1}_{ij}=(N_{\rm randoms}-N_{\rm bins}-1)/(N_{\rm randoms}-1)\langle C^{-1}_{ij}\rangle
. This Hartlap factor compensates for biases arising from inverting a covariance matrix estimated from a limited number of realizations.
4.4
Methodological considerations
The main limitation of this work is the use of a single sky patch, despite the availability of a full-sky lightcone. Ideally, multiple independent realizations would better sample cosmic variance and strengthen the robustness of the results. In practice, however, computing the cross-correlation signal and its covariance over many realizations is computationally and storage prohibitive within our resources.
We justify this single-patch approach on two fronts. First, for our methodological comparison, the single realization serves as a controlled environment in which we apply all 16 mock types and stacking techniques to the same large-scale structure (LSS), ensuring that any observed variations in S/N or profile behavior are driven strictly by the methods themselves. Second, for our lensing forecast, the variance is dominated by CMB noise (detector noise and primary CMB fluctuations) rather than the LSS distribution. As shown in previous work
(Sartori
et al.
,
2025
)
, sample variance contributes only a small fraction of the total covariance compared to the noise level in current
Planck
maps.
5
Results
We present the first forecast of the Voids
×
\times
CMB
κ
\rm\kappa
signal for the
Roman
telescope. In the process, we investigate how mock catalogs of varying levels of complexity affect the signal and its signal-to-noise ratio for different void types, void finders and other methodological choices. We then incorporate instrumental noise and report signal-to-noise (S/N) ratios for various background noise scenarios, including
Planck
, SO, and S4-type experiments.
Figure 3
:
Void
×
\times
CMB lensing profiles and corresponding footprints for the specific mock catalog
N
​
M
N\,M
(M-all) displaying the different void populations for both 3D and 2D samples. In the left panels, the profile corresponding to the average through all voids is depicted in black, and falls close to the intermediate bins in both
λ
v
\lambda_{v}
and
R
v
R_{\rm v}
, depicted in green.
5.1
Impact of mock catalogs on void
×
\times
CMB
κ
\rm\kappa
signal
We quantify the impact of the mock catalog choice by comparing the Void
×
\times
CMB lensing signal measured from each mock to a reference mean lensing profile. This reference profile is constructed by averaging the lensing signal from the mock catalogs that successfully reproduce the void and galaxy one- and two-point statistics of the
Roman
reference catalog
(Pérez Sar
et al.
,
2025
)
8
8
8
These were the cases of
N
​
M
N\,M
and
N
​
M
​
b
ELGs
N\,M\,b_{\rm ELGs}
mock families, regardless of the input tracer selection and
N
​
M
​
b
env
N\,M\,b_{\rm env}
(M-all).
. From now on we will refer to those as
Roman-matched mocks
9
9
9
These catalogs are available and can be provided under request to the first author to perform further forecasting efforts for
Roman
.
. Note that the
Roman
reference catalog itself is not used because no associated CMB lensing maps are available
(Zhai
et al.
,
2021
)
.
As we have mentioned, cosmic voids act as divergent lenses, producing a de-magnification signal,
κ
<
0
\kappa<0
, opposite to the convergent lensing of clusters,
κ
>
0
\kappa>0
. The lensing amplitude scales with the density contrast, with deeper voids generating stronger effects. For 2D voids, the void radius,
R
v
R_{\rm v}
, is defined by the first crossing of the mean density (the zero-crossing of
κ
\kappa
),
while for 3D voids
R
v
R_{\rm v}
aligns more closely with the compensation wall if present. The compensation wall is an overdense shell surrounding the void where the density rises above the cosmic mean and sometimes compensates for its central underdensity.
5.1.1
Total sample
Figure
2
presents the Void
×
\times
CMB
κ
\kappa
signal when all voids in the sample are considered. There we can see that the significant differences observed in the one- and two-point statistics across mock catalogs (see
Pérez Sar
et al.
2025
) do not translate into major differences in the lensing profile. Deviations remain below
2
​
σ
2\sigma
relative to the mean profile and would be indistinguishable once instrumental noise (from surveys such as
Planck
and SO) is included. See Appendix
B
, Figure
10
.
For 3D voids, variations are slightly larger due to the impact of intervening large-scale structure and the limited number of detected voids in the
Roman
-like area. In contrast, 2D voids are defined from a projected density field, therefore part of the same foreground and background structure that contributes to the lensing signal also contributes to defining the void itself, producing more stable profiles.
When a smaller smoothing is used for the 2D void finder (see 2D voids with
sm
VF
=
5
​
h
−
1
{\rm sm_{VF}}=5\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}\penalty 10000\
Mpc) the mocks that better reproduce the reference catalog (namely
N
​
M
N\,M
and
N
​
M
​
b
ELGs
N\,M\,b_{\rm ELGs}
) show reduced scatter, indicating an increased sensitivity to the mock catalog. Nonetheless, all Void
×
\times
CMB lensing profiles remain consistent in shape within the errors below 2
σ
\sigma
. This consistency would only increase once the CMB
κ
\kappa
instrumental noise is included. The lack of significant deviations indicates that differences between the mocks have too small of an impact on the Void
×
\times
CMB lensing signal to generate a spurious tension with
Λ
\Lambda
CDM if we consider the instrumental noise of
Planck
or SO.
In the Appendix
Figures
11
,
12
and
13
, we further explore the effect of applying radius cuts to the void samples (e.g., selecting voids with sizes above and below twice the mean separation particle, mps). This allows us to both test the impact of excluding smaller, less reliable voids likely impacted by shot noise, and also to examine the noise properties of the resulting subsets. The overall conclusions remain consistent with the full sample, though uncertainties increase due to reduced statistics.
Figure 4
:
Distribution of lensing-profile parameters (
κ
0
​
R
v
\rm\kappa_{0R_{\rm v}}
,
κ
max
,
wall
\rm\kappa_{max,wall}
,
κ
Δ
\rm\kappa_{\Delta}
) for different void types in both 3D and 2D catalogs. The blue curve shows the real scale profile, while the other curves, corresponding to different mock catalog types, are offset along the
y
y
-axis for clarity. Colors indicate different tracer biases. All profiles are compared to the mean profile of the
Roman-matched mocks
that successfully reproduce the one- and two-point statistics of the
Roman
Reference Catalog.
5.1.2
Splitting by type
The apparent consistency across mock catalogs and bias selections in the Void
×
\times
CMB lensing signal may partly arise from averaging over the entire sample of voids which can mask differences between void populations. This is a common concern for any void measurement.
There are fundamentally two main void classes: void-in-clouds
(Sheth and van de Weygaert,
2004
)
, which are surrounded by a large overdensity and experience compression and a slower expansion due to the inward gravitational pull; and void-in-voids, which are embedded within larger underdense regions and expand freely with the cosmic expansion. For 3D voids, we use the parameter
λ
v
\lambda_{v}
(Nadathur
et al.
,
2017
)
, defined as
λ
v
=
δ
¯
avg
​
(
R
v
/
[
h
−
1
​
Mpc
]
)
1.2
\lambda_{v}=\bar{\delta}_{\rm avg}\left(R_{\rm v}/[h^{-1}\mathrm{Mpc}]\right)^{1.2}
10
10
10
δ
¯
avg
\bar{\delta}_{\rm avg}
is the average density contrast within the void and
R
v
R_{\rm v}
, the void radius.
, to distinguish between classes. Negative
λ
v
\lambda_{v}
corresponds to underdense void-in-voids, positive
λ
v
\lambda_{v}
indicates void-in-clouds with a strong surrounding compensation wall.
λ
v
\lambda_{v}
values near zero correspond to intermediate cases. In 2D, we use the void radius
R
v
R_{\rm v}
as a proxy, since
λ
v
\lambda_{v}
cannot be directly computed and will not have the same meaning to using the
δ
¯
avg
\bar{\delta}_{\rm avg}
and the
R
v
R_{\rm v}
given by the 2D void finder. Smaller 2D voids are typically void-in-clouds and larger voids tend toward void-in-void, although projection effects make this distinction less precise. Figure
3
illustrates the different types.
To evaluate whether the variation of the Void
×
\times
CMB lensing profile across mock families and tracer selections remains consistent when separating by void type, we classify voids into distinct populations and summarize their lensing profiles using three parameters:
κ
0
​
R
v
\rm{\kappa_{{\rm 0}R_{v}}}
, the lensing signal at the void center;
κ
max
,
wall
\rm{\kappa_{\rm max,wall}}
, the peak signal at the compensation wall (when present); and
κ
Δ
\rm{\kappa_{\rm\Delta}}
, the net convergence defined as the mean
κ
\kappa
inside the void minus the mean
κ
\kappa
in the surrounding region. For 2D voids, this region typically includes the full compensation wall, whereas for 3D voids it may only partially overlap with it. In the plots, the true-scale curve is shown in blue (with values on the
y
y
-axis), while the others are vertically shifted for visualization purposes. All cases are compared against the mean profile constructed from the
Roman-matched mocks
(see Fig.
4
).
For 3D voids,
κ
0
​
R
v
\rm{\kappa_{0R_{v}}}
increases with
λ
v
\lambda_{v}
, reflecting the transition from void-in-void to void-in-cloud types. When
λ
v
\lambda_{v}
is negative (void-in-voids), voids are deeper and produce stronger negative lensing signals. As
λ
v
\lambda_{v}
becomes positive (void-in-clouds), the
κ
\kappa
profile becomes shallower, the surrounding compensation wall grows stronger, and the net de-magnification
κ
Δ
\kappa_{\Delta}
correspondingly decreases (i.e, becomes more positive).
In 3D voids,
λ
v
\lambda_{v}
provides a physically motivated separation of void-in-void and void-in-cloud populations. While its functional form is calibrated empirically from simulations, the parameter itself traces the underlying gravitational potential
(Nadathur
et al.
,
2017
)
. In 2D, we rely on
R
v
R_{\rm v}
as a proxy, which is less precise. As a result, binning 2D voids produces a composite profile of objects whose true classifications are ambiguous. We note that this does not undermine the value of 2D voids but for them we still lack a parameter that cleanly separates the underlying populations.
For all 2D void types,
κ
0
​
R
v
\kappa_{0R_{\rm v}}
is negative and becomes slightly more negative for larger voids. This follows from the definition of 2D voids, which are identified as negative density contrasts (corresponding to negative convergence values) in the projected galaxy field. The compensation wall signal,
κ
max
,
wall
\rm{\kappa_{max,wall}}
, remains nearly constant and also suggests weaker walls compared to highly compensated 3D voids. Finally,
κ
Δ
\rm{\kappa_{\Delta}}
shows that smaller voids, though shallower, exhibit stronger compensation walls and can yield positive values, whereas larger voids, while being deeper, drive
κ
Δ
\kappa_{\Delta}
toward less positive values.
Overall, the tendencies found here agree with
Schuster
et al.
(
2025
)
. Voids gradually empty their interiors over time, with matter streaming toward their boundaries. Large, under-compensated voids (void-in-void) in underdense regions evacuate matter efficiently, producing deep cores and weaker net compensation. Smaller, over-compensated voids (void-in-cloud) embedded in high-density environments remain shallower, with matter accumulating near their boundaries, leading to stronger compensation walls and positive
κ
Δ
\kappa_{\Delta}
.
For both 2D and 3D voids, all mock catalogs display nearly identical trends and remain close to the mean profile, reinforcing the idea that the consistency found for the full void sample also holds when separating by type.
5.1.3
Signal-to-noise ratios
Figure
5
shows the total S/N (left) and the per-void or normalized S/N (right) across the four mock families and tracer selections.
For the full set of mocks, both the total and per-void S/N exhibit a characteristic scatter of approximately 10
%
\%
, which is slightly more pronounced for the normalized S/N in the 3D voids case. Although the lensing profiles in the previous section appear visually more uniform than the S/N distributions, they exhibit variations of a comparable magnitude. The apparent smoothness of the profiles is primarily a result of the statistical uncertainties: the variations lie within the error bars, representing deviations typically below
1
​
σ
1\sigma
and rarely exceeding
2
​
σ
2\sigma
.
Restricting to the mocks that match the one- and two-point statistics of the
Roman
reference catalog (
N
​
M
NM
and
N
​
M
​
b
ELGs
NMb_{\rm ELGs}
), the lensing profiles vary at the level of
∼
1
\sim 1
–
3
%
3\%
for 2D voids and
∼
7
\sim 7
–
9
%
9\%
for 3D voids, while the S/N scatter is reduced to
∼
0.2
\sim 0.2
–
2
%
2\%
(2D) and below
∼
5
%
\sim 5\%
(3D). In contrast, the non-matched families show larger variations, with profile scatter of
∼
6
%
\sim 6\%
(2D) and
∼
10
\sim 10
–
15
%
15\%
(3D), and S/N dispersions reaching
∼
10
%
\sim 10\%
(2D) and up to
∼
20
%
\sim 20\%
(3D).
Figure 5
:
Comparison of the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) (left panel) and the signal-to-noise per void (S/N/
N
v
\sqrt{N_{v}}
) (right panel) for all mock catalogs and tracer biases.
A main result of this comparison is that 2D voids reach higher S/N values for all mocks catalogs, and once the number of voids is factored out, their efficiency is about twice that of 3D voids. This indicates that projected voids are intrinsically more effective tracers of the CMB lensing signal, as seen in other previous works
(Vielzeuf
et al.
,
2021a
; Camacho-Ciurana
et al.
,
2024
; Demirbozan
et al.
,
2024
)
.
The noise properties also show a dependence on the tracer selection, most notably in the simplest mock family,
N
N
. In this case, we can see how mass-selected samples (M-all, M-ELGs) trace voids more cleanly, resulting in higher S/N per void. By contrast, random-selected samples (R-all,R-ELGs) populate less dense environments which fragments voids and align slightly worse with the lensing signal. For the rest of the cases, the interplay between the mock family and the tracer selection of the input files becomes less straightforward and changes in a non-trivial manner the S/N distribution.
Ultimately, we note that our goal here is not to identify the catalog with the highest S/N, but to understand in general terms how and why the S/N varies across the different mock catalogs under study. For our analysis, we will adopt the mock that best reproduces the one- and two-point statistics of the
Roman
reference case, regardless of its S/N. If the M-all case shows lower noise because it is a more efficient tracer of CMB lensing, this is valuable for understanding an optimally designed tracer. However, if our real survey lies closer to M-ELGs, then the higher noise observed in this mock is a realistic reflection of what we would expect from the actual survey data.
5.1.4
Rescale vs Not rescale
The Void
×
\times
CMB lensing signal can be measured using two main approaches: rescaling voids by their radius or stacking them by their angular size
(Nadathur and Crittenden,
2016
; Kovács
et al.
,
2020
)
. Rescaling prioritizes statistical power by normalizing all profiles to a common scale (in units of the void radius), producing uniform stacks where all voids contribute equally to the signal. Although the noise varies across voids due to their different angular sizes and corresponding number of CMB pixels, in this method the lensing signal adds constructively while noise averages down, maximizing the signal-to-noise ratio.
Non-rescaled stacking, on the other hand, emphasizes physical accuracy, preserving the voids’ intrinsic sizes and environments, though it can align profiles of very different scales and often requires some binning by type or size which reduces its signal-to-noise ratio.
Regarding the uncertainties of the profiles: inner bins are noisier in both approaches because we are averaging over less pixels, but outer bins behave differently—rescaled profiles show decreasing uncertainties with radius, whereas in non-rescaled profiles uncertainties increase as cosmic variance becomes significant. This holds for the standard radial binning (fixed fraction of
R
v
R_{v}
or fixed angular width per bin). Alternative schemes (e.g. equal-area or adaptive bins) can redistribute pixel counts and modify this scaling. Finally we note that, since the CMB noise is scale-dependent, non-rescaled stacking maintains a more consistent noise distribution, avoiding the mixing of contributions across scales as in the rescaled method.
Figure 6
:
Non-rescaled Void
×
\times
CMB lensing profiles for the mock catalog
N
​
M
N\,M
(M-all) and various void populations.
Figure 7
:
S/N (upper panel) and S/N
N
v
\sqrt{N_{\rm v}}
(bottom panel) for the mock catalog
N
​
M
N\,M
(M-all). The results are presented for different radius cuts and void-type divisions. Circles for 2D voids correspond to smoothing scales of
sm
VF
=
10
​
h
−
1
{\rm sm_{VF}}=10\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}\penalty 10000\
Mpc. In this case the bins for the void types are [11,28], [28,49], and [49,283]
h
−
1
h^{-1}
Mpc.
We repeat the analysis using the non-rescaled methodology (see Appendix
D
) and find consistent results. The main conclusions remain unchanged: the strong differences between mock catalogs in one- and two-point statistics are greatly suppressed in Void
×
\times
CMB lensing profiles independently of the methodology, underlining the robustness of this observable.
The main difference appears when separating by void type. For 3D voids, the classification with the parameter
λ
v
\lambda_{v}
provides a clean separation between void-in-void and void-in-cloud types, producing similar profiles for both non-rescale and rescale methodologies. For 2D voids however, where the classification relies on void radius, non-rescaled profiles reveal steep, localized signals for small void-in-clouds and broader, shallower profiles for large void-in-voids. This is a probe of the scaling of the lensing amplitude with a physical mass deficit (which depends on the void size). Rescaling compresses these distinctions, producing an apparently universal profile across void types.
5.1.5
Mock systematics and cosmological implications
A
∼
10
%
\sim 10\%
variation in the cross-correlation signal across different mock catalogs is not negligible in the context of precision cosmology. While such differences remain statistically indistinguishable under current
Planck
noise levels—typically appearing at less than the
1
​
σ
1\sigma
level—they constitute a potential systematic for next-generation surveys where instrumental noise is significantly reduced. Specifically, a 10
%
\%
shift in signal amplitude is comparable to the physical suppression expected from massive neutrinos (
m
ν
≈
0.16
m_{\nu}\approx 0.16
eV) as seen in
(Vielzeuf
et al.
,
2021a
)
. Our results indicate, however, that the Voids
×
\times
CMB lensing signal is less sensitive to specific mock-building nuances than other probes, and if the one- and two-point statistics for both galaxies and voids are consistent with the data (in our case with the reference catalog), the discrepancies in the lensing profiles drop below 10
%
\%
, which would likely not constitute the cause of any cosmological tension. This difference becomes even more negligible for 2D voids reaching sub percent level with the use of a bigger smoothing scale, opposite of the neutrino effect, where larger smoothing scales typically enhance the physical sensitivity to neutrino mass.
It is important to note however that in our framework, the one- and two-point statistics for both galaxies and voids emerge as natural byproducts of the mock-generation process rather than being manually tuned to fit observations. If methods such as Halo Occupation Distribution are used to enforce agreement with the observed clustering, part of the cosmological information—such as neutrino effects that affect both the clustering and the lensing signature—may be inadvertently absorbed into the tracer bias and create artificial tensions. We thus consider that a consistent approach to infer cosmological parameters would be to analyze the clustering and the lensing signal jointly since neutrinos or other cosmological signatures might affect both.
5.2
Forecast
We present the Void
×
\times
CMB lensing forecast for the
Roman
Space Telescope. We use the
N
​
M
NM
mock (M-all selection) as our baseline, since is the case that best reproduces the one- and two-point statistics of the
Roman
reference catalog. For this forecast, we first determine the configuration that maximizes the signal-to-noise—comparing the different scaling strategies and void selections—and then use the optimal setup to forecast realistic S/N values under different instrumental noise levels.
Figure 8
:
Forecasted S/N of Void
×
\times
CMB lensing for 3D and 2D voids with varying noise levels and CMB smoothing.
5.2.1
Signal optimization
Figure
7
shows the total S/N and the per-void (normalized) S/N/
N
v
\sqrt{N_{v}}
for rescaled and non-rescaled profiles across different radius cuts and void populations.
•
2D vs 3D voids. The main trend is that 2D voids outperform 3D voids, especially at smaller smoothing scales (
sm
VF
=
5
​
h
−
1
{\rm sm_{VF}}=5\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}\penalty 10000\
Mpc), where the void finder sharpens the contrast of underdensities and increases the number of voids detected.
•
Radius cuts: Regardless of the scaling of the profiles a separate trend appears for 2D and 3D voids when splitting by size due to their different definitions of radius. For 3D voids, the 2 mps (mean particle separation) cut acts as a noise filter that removes spurious detections from shot noise, producing a cleaner sample with higher total S/N and per-void efficiency. For 2D voids, the void radius has two components: the angular radius (influenced by the smoothing scale,
sm
VF
{\rm sm_{VF}}
) which is what we consider as the void radius, and a fixed line-of-sight radius coming from the slice thickness. The cut does not improve the sample purity but only filters different angular sizes. So for 2D voids, the per-void efficiency remains nearly unchanged across bins, and the total S/N is mainly driven by the number of voids. This is most evident in the smallest bin
<
<
2mps for
sm
VF
=
10
​
h
−
1
{\rm sm_{VF}}=10\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}
Mpc, where the smoothing already exceeds the threshold and the cut removes only
∼
\sim
8
%
\%
of the sample. The remaining small voids (
∼
\sim
2700) show an apparently higher per-void efficiency due to their low number compared to the
sm
VF
=
5
​
h
−
1
{\rm sm_{VF}}=5\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}
Mpc case (
∼
\sim
32000), despite their comparable lensing depths.
•
Binning vs Full Sample: While subdividing voids by type or size preserves distinct physical profiles and prevents signal dilution, we find that for a Roman-like survey (
∼
\sim
2000 deg
2
), the loss of statistics per bin generally outweighs the benefits of separating by void type, at least for the rescaled methodology. Consequently, stacking the full void sample maximizes the total S/N for this specific footprint.
11
11
11
We note that when comparing to real data some works have shown that a joint fit across bins can recover or even increase the cumulative S/N by preserving information that would otherwise be diluted
(Raghunathan
et al.
,
2020b
)
.
•
Rescaling vs Non-rescaling: The rescaled methodology provides the highest total S/N when using the full void sample, as it aligns the features of different-sized voids. In contrast, the non-rescaled approach only shows a slight S/N gain when dividing 3D voids by void type. For 2D voids, no improvement is observed when binning because in our main (rescaled) analysis we define bins with equal numbers of voids, which mixes a wide range of radii (e.g., 32–283
h
−
1
h^{-1}\penalty 10000\
Mpc) in a single stack. For the non-rescaled methodology this choice combines intrinsically different profiles and reduces the signal. While previous studies
(Raghunathan
et al.
,
2020a
; Demirbozan
et al.
,
2024
)
show that non-rescaled profiles can achieve comparable S/N when combined with CMB filtering techniques (like the matched filter), we focus here on how these methods respond without additional map filtering.
5.2.2
Forecast across instrumental noise levels
Based on the results above, we adopt the rescaled methodology applied to the full void sample as our baseline for the instrumental noise forecast. Figure
8
shows our forecasts results, giving the total signal-to-noise (S/N) for 3D voids and 2D voids across multiple CMB map configurations: the
x
x
-axis represents the smoothing applied to the CMB map to suppress small-scale instrumental noise, and color markers indicate different noise levels, from none (black) to CMB-S4-like, SO, and
Planck
.
•
Smoothing and Noise Response. We find that noisier surveys require stronger CMB smoothing to reach peak S/N; for example,
Planck
requires a smoothing scale of
∼
\sim
1
∘
, whereas SO and S4-like maps perform optimally at 0.2
∘
–0.5
∘
. Across all noise regimes, the
sm
VF
=
5
​
h
−
1
{\rm sm_{VF}}=5\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}\penalty 10000\
Mpc 2D voids remain the best option, though they exhibit higher sensitivity to the choice of mock catalog (as seen in section
5.1
).
•
Deviation from noise-free trends. Although we have seen that rescaling the full sample of voids is generally optimal, our comprehensive comparison of stacking techniques and void populations (detailed in Table
3
of the Appendix) reveals how instrumental noise can alter these trends:
–
Rescaling vs Non-rescaling. In the full-sample case, rescaling consistently improves the S/N by
∼
\sim
10–20
%
\%
compared to the non-rescaled approach. However, for 3D voids and
Planck
noise, the non-rescaled method yields a 33
%
\%
higher S/N. This is likely because rescaling upweights the high-multipole noise associated with smaller, more numerous voids—an effect to which the 3D sample is particularly sensitive.
–
Binning vs Full Sample: In the noise-free case, stacking the full sample is preferred. However, as instrumental noise increases, binning 3D voids by type becomes increasingly effective for both rescaled and non-rescaled methodologies, specially for noise levels as SO and
Planck
. This suggests that grouping similar profiles provides a variance reduction that outweighs the loss of statistical power, particularly for the deepest underdensities. For 2D voids, dividing by type still shows no S/N improvement in either methodology and noise scheme. For the rescaled methodology we do not have a clean separation of void types that boost the signal and for the non-rescaled methodology the binning is too wide to produce distinct profiles.
In the future, matched filter techniques could potentially enhance the S/N of binned voids in the non-rescaled method to match the rescaled approach
(Raghunathan
et al.
,
2020b
; Demirbozan
et al.
,
2024
)
. This would allow a clearer separation of void types without sacrificing the precision. Moreover, these filtering techniques reduce the map noise by weighting scales according to signal-to-noise, rather than manually applying Gaussian smoothing to suppress small-scale fluctuations, as we do for the rescaled methodology. For
Planck
-level noise their improvement over standard stacking is modest, but for future low-noise surveys such as CMB-S4-like they are expected to become essential for fully exploiting the available statistical power. In this work we present a conservative forecast based on the rescaled methodology, for which matched filtering is not directly applicable, and defer optimized analyses to future studies including realistic noise realizations.
6
Conclusions
The path toward establishing Void
×
\times
CMB lensing as a precision cosmological probe requires both an understanding of its dependence on cosmological parameters and of the impact of methodological choices on its measurement. In this work, we have focused on the latter, specifically tailored for the high-density regime of the
Roman
Space Telescope.
To this end, in a companion paper
(Pérez Sar
et al.
,
2025
)
we develop and validate a method to replicate mock catalogs from a given parent simulation for other simulations of interest such as those with associated CMB maps. There, we systematically analyze how the different catalogs of varying complexity affect void and galaxy statistics. The resulting mocks constitute the datasets of this study, where we examine their impact on the Void
×
\times
CMB lensing signal and its associated noise properties. In this work, we compare 2D and 3D void-finding algorithms and measurement strategies, and produce forecasts for the
Roman
Telescope in combination with current and next-generation CMB experiments (
Planck
, SO, CMB-S4-like).
We note that while this study utilizes a single sky realization, this choice provides a controlled environment to isolate methodological systematics. With the underlying large-scale structure (LSS) fixed, we ensure that the observed variations in the lensing signal are driven strictly by mock-generation techniques rather than by stochastic fluctuations. Cosmic variance can still affect the absolute amplitude, but the relative differences we find reflect the effect of the modeling choices alone.
Our conclusions are:
Stability of the Void
×
\times
CMB lensing signal to mock catalog features.
The Void
×
\times
CMB lensing signal itself remains stable across different mock catalogs, even when galaxy and void clustering properties vary substantially. Since CMB lensing probes the underlying total mass distribution, the signal is less sensitive to the fine details of galaxy assignment or galaxy bias. We find that the dispersion in the profiles across the full suite of mocks is typically of the order of
∼
10
%
\sim 10\%
. At the noise levels of current experiments like
Planck
, or even SO, these variations are statistically sub-dominant and unlikely to pose any tensions. However, for next-generation experiments (e.g., CMB S4-like), a 10
%
\%
shift becomes significant, as it is comparable to some cosmological signature such as the suppression in the signal expected from massive neutrinos (
m
ν
≈
0.16
m_{\nu}\approx 0.16
eV)
Vielzeuf
et al.
(
2023a
)
.
Crucially, we find that the differences between mocks are significantly diminished for 2D voids. When restricting our analysis to mocks that correctly reproduce the one- and two-point statistics of the
Roman
reference catalog (the
N
​
M
NM
and
N
​
M
​
b
ELGs
NMb_{\rm ELGs}
families), the lensing profile variations drop to
∼
1
\sim 1
–
3
%
3\%
for 2D voids and the S/N scatter is reduced to
∼
0.2
\sim 0.2
–
2
%
2\%
. Furthermore, we observe that as the smoothing scale increases, the sensitivity to mock-building nuances decreases, whereas the physical sensitivity to the neutrino mass is reported to increase. This divergent behavior suggests that 2D void-lensing is particularly well-suited for breaking the degeneracy between methodological systematics and new physics.
Rescaling and non-rescaling methodologies perform similarly, though non-rescaling generally yields a lower signal-to-noise ratio. The use of matched filters could potentially mitigate this difference, but lies beyond the scope of this work. We also find that while 2D void finders provide higher signal-to-noise (about twice when factoring out the void abundance), 3D voids offer a clearer distinction between different void environments. This is valuable for testing the reliability of mocks by confronting the environment-dependent predictions with real observations and it is also useful for physical interpretation and theory development.
Beyond maximizing the S/N while reducing catalog-specific effects, it is important to identify which voids carry the strongest discriminatory power—such as the 2D voids used for modified gravity tests in
Paillas
et al.
(
2019
)
or for studying the neutrino effect
Vielzeuf
et al.
(
2021a
)
. A systematic study of how the Void
×
\times
CMB lensing signal responds to a broader parameter space under different stacking strategies and void definitions is a necessary step for establishing voids as a precision probe.
Forecasts for the
Roman
telescope using the best mock catalog case.
Our forecasts show that current
Planck
data are noise-limited and do not provide competitive constraints for the
Roman
Space Telescope (see below). However, upcoming CMB experiments such as the Simons Observatory (SO) and CMB-S4-like surveys will deliver substantial improvements in sensitivity. Our main results are summarized in Table
2
.
Noise configuration
S4-like
SO
Planck
S/N
sm
map
[º]
S/N
sm
map
[º]
S/N
sm
map
(º)
Void type
3D voids
18
0.5
13
0.5
8
1
2D Voids
(sm
VF
= 10
h
−
1
h^{-1}
Mpc)
23
0.2
19
0.5
12
0.8
2D Voids
(sm
VF
= 5
h
−
1
h^{-1}
Mpc)
31
0.2
22
0.5
13
0.8
Table 2
:
Maximum S/N and associated CMB smoothing scale for the
Roman
Voids
×
\times
CMB lensing cross-correlations. Results span across different noise configurations and void finders using the full 2D and 3D void samples without dividing into populations.
The optimal smoothing scale is survey- and void finder-dependent when applying the rescaled methodology. Compared to results from other works
(e.g., Sartori
et al.
,
2025
, who combines DESI DR9 3D voids with
Planck
)
that already report
∼
17
​
σ
\rm\sim 17\sigma
, our findings indicate that this observable benefits more from larger survey footprints than from extreme depth over limited areas.
Although
Roman
’s relatively smaller sky coverage may limit standalone lensing constraints, its depth, tracer density, and angular resolution will enable the detection of smaller voids and improved mapping of their internal structure. This extends void studies beyond the capabilities of previous wide but relatively sparse surveys. As analyses transition to denser, high-resolution data, methodological aspects become increasingly important to improve both the detection significance and the scientific return. Our study contributes to this broader effort by testing the best methodological configuration for
Roman
’s Voids
×
\times
CMB lensing measurements. Equally important is the planned synergy of
Roman
with other surveys and cosmological probes, critical for obtaining robust constraints and mitigating systematics. Combined with forthcoming CMB datasets, as well as with large-scale structure measurements from e.g. DESI, Euclid and LSST,
Roman
’s observations will deliver complementary and high-fidelity constraints on cosmic structure and evolution
(Eifler
et al.
,
2021
; Wenzl
et al.
,
2022
; Eifler
et al.
,
2024
)
. In this exciting scenario, Void
×
\times
CMB lensing has the potential to place direct constraints on cosmological parameters for the first time.
7
Acknowledgements
This paper made use of the IAC HTCondor facility
(
http://research.cs.wisc.edu/htcondor/
), partly financed by the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness with FEDER funds, code IACA13-3E-2493. MP wishes to acknowledge the contribution of the IAC High-Performance Computing support team and hardware facilities to the results of this research, specially to Ángel de Vicente.
MP acknowledges Giulio Fabbian for useful discussions during the early stages of this work, as well as support from the pre-doctoral program at the Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute. Research at the Flatiron Institute is supported by the Simons Foundation. MP acknowledges support from the Agencia Estatal de Investigación del Ministerio de Ciencia en Innovación (AEIMICIN) and the European Social Fund (ESF+) under grant PRE2021-098156. MP and C.H.-M acknowledge the support of the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation under the grants PID2021-126616NB-I00 and ”DarkMaps” PID2022-142142NB-I00, and from the European Union through the grant ”UNDARK” of the Widening participation and spreading excellence program (project number 101159929).
The Large-Scale Structure (LSS) research group at Konkoly Observatory has been supported by a
Lendület
excellence grant by the Hungarian Academy of Sciences (MTA). This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement number 101130774. Funding for this project was also available in part through the Hungarian National Research, Development and Innovation Office (NKFIH, grant OTKA NN147550).
AP acknowledges support from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon programme (COSMOBEST ERC funded project, grant agreement 101078174), as well as support from the French government under the France 2030 investment plan, as part of the Initiative d’Excellence d’Aix-Marseille Université - A*MIDEX AMX-22-CEI-03 as well as support from the Center for Computational Astrophysics, the Flatiron Institute and the Simons Foundation for early stages of this work.
YW gratefully acknowledges support from NASA Grant 80NSSC24M0021, ”Project Infrastructure for the Roman Galaxy Redshift Survey”.
References
K. N. Abazajian, J. K. Adelman-McCarthy, M. A. Agüeros, S. S. Allam, C. Allende Prieto, D. An, K. S. J. Anderson, S. F. Anderson, J. Annis, N. A. Bahcall, C. A. L. Bailer-Jones, J. C. Barentine, B. A. Bassett, A. C. Becker, T. C. Beers, E. F. Bell, V. Belokurov, A. A. Berlind, E. F. Berman, M. Bernardi, S. J. Bickerton, D. Bizyaev, J. P. Blakeslee, M. R. Blanton, J. J. Bochanski, W. N. Boroski, H. J. Brewington, J. Brinchmann, J. Brinkmann, R. J. Brunner, T. Budavári, L. N. Carey, S. Carliles, M. A. Carr, F. J. Castander, D. Cinabro, A. J. Connolly, I. Csabai, C. E. Cunha, P. C. Czarapata, J. R. A. Davenport, E. de Haas, B. Dilday, M. Doi, D. J. Eisenstein, M. L. Evans, N. W. Evans, X. Fan, S. D. Friedman, J. A. Frieman, M. Fukugita, B. T. Gänsicke, E. Gates, B. Gillespie, G. Gilmore, B. Gonzalez, C. F. Gonzalez, E. K. Grebel, J. E. Gunn, Z. Györy, P. B. Hall, P. Harding, F. H. Harris, M. Harvanek, S. L. Hawley, J. J. E. Hayes, T. M. Heckman, J. S. Hendry, G. S. Hennessy, R. B. Hindsley, J. Hoblitt, C. J. Hogan, D. W. Hogg, J. A. Holtzman, J. B. Hyde, S. Ichikawa, T. Ichikawa, M. Im, Ž. Ivezić, S. Jester, L. Jiang, J. A. Johnson, A. M. Jorgensen, M. Jurić, S. M. Kent, R. Kessler, S. J. Kleinman, G. R. Knapp, K. Konishi, R. G. Kron, J. Krzesinski, N. Kuropatkin, H. Lampeitl, S. Lebedeva, M. G. Lee, Y. S. Lee, R. French Leger, S. Lépine, N. Li, M. Lima, H. Lin, D. C. Long, C. P. Loomis, J. Loveday, R. H. Lupton, E. Magnier, O. Malanushenko, V. Malanushenko, R. Mandelbaum, B. Margon, J. P. Marriner, D. Martínez-Delgado, T. Matsubara, P. M. McGehee, T. A. McKay, A. Meiksin, H. L. Morrison, F. Mullally, J. A. Munn, T. Murphy, T. Nash, A. Nebot, E. H. Neilsen, H. J. Newberg, P. R. Newman, R. C. Nichol, T. Nicinski, M. Nieto-Santisteban, A. Nitta, S. Okamura, D. J. Oravetz, J. P. Ostriker, R. Owen, N. Padmanabhan, K. Pan, C. Park, G. Pauls, J. Peoples, W. J. Percival, J. R. Pier, A. C. Pope, D. Pourbaix, P. A. Price, N. Purger, T. Quinn, M. J. Raddick, P. Re Fiorentin, G. T. Richards, M. W. Richmond, A. G. Riess, H. Rix, C. M. Rockosi, M. Sako, D. J. Schlegel, D. P. Schneider, R. Scholz, M. R. Schreiber, A. D. Schwope, U. Seljak, B. Sesar, E. Sheldon, K. Shimasaku, V. C. Sibley, A. E. Simmons, T. Sivarani, J. Allyn Smith, M. C. Smith, V. Smolčić, S. A. Snedden, A. Stebbins, M. Steinmetz, C. Stoughton, M. A. Strauss, M. SubbaRao, Y. Suto, A. S. Szalay, I. Szapudi, P. Szkody, M. Tanaka, M. Tegmark, L. F. A. Teodoro, A. R. Thakar, C. A. Tremonti, D. L. Tucker, A. Uomoto, D. E. Vanden Berk, J. Vandenberg, S. Vidrih, M. S. Vogeley, W. Voges, N. P. Vogt, Y. Wadadekar, S. Watters, D. H. Weinberg, A. A. West, S. D. M. White, B. C. Wilhite, A. C. Wonders, B. Yanny, and D. R. Yocum (2009)
The Seventh Data Release of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey
.
ApJS
182
(
2
),
pp. 543–558
.
External Links:
Document
,
0812.0649
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
K. N. Abazajian, P. Adshead, Z. Ahmed, S. W. Allen, D. Alonso, K. S. Arnold, C. Baccigalupi, J. G. Bartlett, N. Battaglia, B. A. Benson, C. A. Bischoff, J. Borrill, V. Buza, E. Calabrese, R. Caldwell, J. E. Carlstrom, C. L. Chang, T. M. Crawford, F. Cyr-Racine, F. De Bernardis, T. de Haan, S. di Serego Alighieri, J. Dunkley, C. Dvorkin, J. Errard, G. Fabbian, S. Feeney, S. Ferraro, J. P. Filippini, R. Flauger, G. M. Fuller, V. Gluscevic, D. Green, D. Grin, E. Grohs, J. W. Henning, J. C. Hill, R. Hlozek, G. Holder, W. Holzapfel, W. Hu, K. M. Huffenberger, R. Keskitalo, L. Knox, A. Kosowsky, J. Kovac, E. D. Kovetz, C. Kuo, A. Kusaka, M. Le Jeune, A. T. Lee, M. Lilley, M. Loverde, M. S. Madhavacheril, A. Mantz, D. J. E. Marsh, J. McMahon, P. D. Meerburg, J. Meyers, A. D. Miller, J. B. Munoz, H. N. Nguyen, M. D. Niemack, M. Peloso, J. Peloton, L. Pogosian, C. Pryke, M. Raveri, C. L. Reichardt, G. Rocha, A. Rotti, E. Schaan, M. M. Schmittfull, D. Scott, N. Sehgal, S. Shandera, B. D. Sherwin, T. L. Smith, L. Sorbo, G. D. Starkman, K. T. Story, A. van Engelen, J. D. Vieira, S. Watson, N. Whitehorn, and W. L. Kimmy Wu (2016)
CMB-S4 Science Book, First Edition
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:1610.02743
.
External Links:
Document
,
1610.02743
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
T. M. C. Abbott, M. Aguena, A. Alarcon, S. Allam, O. Alves, A. Amon, F. Andrade-Oliveira, J. Annis, S. Avila, D. Bacon, E. Baxter, K. Bechtol, M. R. Becker, G. M. Bernstein, S. Bhargava, S. Birrer, J. Blazek, A. Brandao-Souza, S. L. Bridle, D. Brooks, E. Buckley-Geer, D. L. Burke, H. Camacho, A. Campos, A. Carnero Rosell, M. Carrasco Kind, J. Carretero, F. J. Castander, R. Cawthon, C. Chang, A. Chen, R. Chen, A. Choi, C. Conselice, J. Cordero, M. Costanzi, M. Crocce, L. N. da Costa, M. E. da Silva Pereira, C. Davis, T. M. Davis, J. De Vicente, J. DeRose, S. Desai, E. Di Valentino, H. T. Diehl, J. P. Dietrich, S. Dodelson, P. Doel, C. Doux, A. Drlica-Wagner, K. Eckert, T. F. Eifler, F. Elsner, J. Elvin-Poole, S. Everett, A. E. Evrard, X. Fang, A. Farahi, E. Fernandez, I. Ferrero, A. Ferté, P. Fosalba, O. Friedrich, J. Frieman, J. García-Bellido, M. Gatti, E. Gaztanaga, D. W. Gerdes, T. Giannantonio, G. Giannini, D. Gruen, R. A. Gruendl, J. Gschwend, G. Gutierrez, I. Harrison, W. G. Hartley, K. Herner, S. R. Hinton, D. L. Hollowood, K. Honscheid, B. Hoyle, E. M. Huff, D. Huterer, B. Jain, D. J. James, M. Jarvis, N. Jeffrey, T. Jeltema, A. Kovacs, E. Krause, R. Kron, K. Kuehn, N. Kuropatkin, O. Lahav, P. -F. Leget, P. Lemos, A. R. Liddle, C. Lidman, M. Lima, H. Lin, N. MacCrann, M. A. G. Maia, J. L. Marshall, P. Martini, J. McCullough, P. Melchior, J. Mena-Fernández, F. Menanteau, R. Miquel, J. J. Mohr, R. Morgan, J. Muir, J. Myles, S. Nadathur, A. Navarro-Alsina, R. C. Nichol, R. L. C. Ogando, Y. Omori, A. Palmese, S. Pandey, Y. Park, F. Paz-Chinchón, D. Petravick, A. Pieres, A. A. Plazas Malagón, A. Porredon, J. Prat, M. Raveri, M. Rodriguez-Monroy, R. P. Rollins, A. K. Romer, A. Roodman, R. Rosenfeld, A. J. Ross, E. S. Rykoff, S. Samuroff, C. Sánchez, E. Sanchez, J. Sanchez, D. Sanchez Cid, V. Scarpine, M. Schubnell, D. Scolnic, L. F. Secco, S. Serrano, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, E. Sheldon, T. Shin, M. Smith, M. Soares-Santos, E. Suchyta, M. E. C. Swanson, M. Tabbutt, G. Tarle, D. Thomas, C. To, A. Troja, M. A. Troxel, D. L. Tucker, I. Tutusaus, T. N. Varga, A. R. Walker, N. Weaverdyck, R. Wechsler, J. Weller, B. Yanny, B. Yin, Y. Zhang, J. Zuntz, and DES Collaboration (2022)
Dark Energy Survey Year 3 results: Cosmological constraints from galaxy clustering and weak lensing
.
Phys. Rev. D
105
(
2
),
pp. 023520
.
External Links:
Document
,
2105.13549
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Abdul Karim, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, L. Allen, C. Allende Prieto, O. Alves, A. Anand, U. Andrade, E. Armengaud, A. Aviles, S. Bailey, C. Baltay, P. Bansal, A. Bault, J. Behera, S. BenZvi, D. Bianchi, C. Blake, S. Brieden, A. Brodzeller, D. Brooks, E. Buckley-Geer, E. Burtin, R. Calderon, R. Canning, A. C. Rosell, P. Carrilho, L. Casas, F. J. Castander, M. Charles, E. Chaussidon, J. Chaves-Montero, D. Chebat, X. Chen, T. Claybaugh, S. Cole, A. P. Cooper, A. Cuceu, K. S. Dawson, A. de la Macorra, A. de Mattia, N. Deiosso, J. Della Costa, R. Demina, A. Dey, B. Dey, Z. Ding, P. Doel, J. Edelstein, D. J. Eisenstein, W. Elbers, P. Fagrelius, K. Fanning, E. Fernández-García, S. Ferraro, A. Font-Ribera, J. E. Forero-Romero, C. S. Frenk, C. Garcia-Quintero, L. H. Garrison, E. Gaztañaga, H. Gil-Marín, S. Gontcho A Gontcho, D. Gonzalez, A. X. Gonzalez-Morales, C. Gordon, D. Green, G. Gutierrez, J. Guy, B. Hadzhiyska, C. Hahn, S. He, M. Herbold, H. K. Herrera-Alcantar, M.-F. Ho, K. Honscheid, C. Howlett, D. Huterer, M. Ishak, S. Juneau, N. V. Kamble, N. G. Karaçaylı, R. Kehoe, S. Kent, A. G. Kim, D. Kirkby, T. Kisner, S. E. Koposov, A. Kremin, A. Krolewski, O. Lahav, C. Lamman, M. Landriau, D. Lang, J. Lasker, J. M. Le Goff, L. Le Guillou, A. Leauthaud, M. E. Levi, Q. Li, T. S. Li, K. Lodha, M. Lokken, F. Lozano-Rodríguez, C. Magneville, M. Manera, P. Martini, W. L. Matthewson, A. Meisner, J. Mena-Fernández, A. Menegas, T. Mergulhão, R. Miquel, J. Moustakas, A. Muñoz-Gutiérrez, D. Muñoz-Santos, A. D. Myers, S. Nadathur, K. Naidoo, L. Napolitano, J. A. Newman, G. Niz, H. E. Noriega, E. Paillas, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, J. Pan, J. A. Peacock, M. Pellejero Ibanez, W. J. Percival, A. Pérez-Fernández, I. Pérez-Ràfols, M. M. Pieri, C. Poppett, F. Prada, D. Rabinowitz, A. Raichoor, C. Ramírez-Pérez, M. Rashkovetskyi, C. Ravoux, J. Rich, A. Rocher, C. Rockosi, J. Rohlf, J. O. Román-Herrera, A. J. Ross, G. Rossi, R. Ruggeri, V. Ruhlmann-Kleider, L. Samushia, E. Sanchez, N. Sanders, D. Schlegel, M. Schubnell, H. Seo, A. Shafieloo, R. Sharples, J. Silber, F. Sinigaglia, D. Sprayberry, T. Tan, G. Tarlé, P. Taylor, W. Turner, L. A. Ureña-López, R. Vaisakh, F. Valdes, G. Valogiannis, M. Vargas-Magaña, L. Verde, M. Walther, B. A. Weaver, D. H. Weinberg, M. White, M. Wolfson, C. Yèche, J. Yu, E. A. Zaborowski, P. Zarrouk, Z. Zhai, H. Zhang, C. Zhao, G. B. Zhao, R. Zhou, H. Zou, and DESI Collaboration (2025)
DESI DR2 results. II. Measurements of baryon acoustic oscillations and cosmological constraints
.
Phys. Rev. D
112
(
8
),
pp. 083515
.
External Links:
Document
,
2503.14738
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
P. Ade, J. Aguirre, Z. Ahmed, S. Aiola, A. Ali, D. Alonso, M. A. Alvarez, K. Arnold, P. Ashton, J. Austermann, H. Awan, C. Baccigalupi, T. Baildon, D. Barron, N. Battaglia, R. Battye, E. Baxter, A. Bazarko, J. A. Beall, R. Bean, D. Beck, S. Beckman, B. Beringue, F. Bianchini, S. Boada, D. Boettger, J. R. Bond, J. Borrill, M. L. Brown, S. M. Bruno, S. Bryan, E. Calabrese, V. Calafut, P. Calisse, J. Carron, A. Challinor, G. Chesmore, Y. Chinone, J. Chluba, H. S. Cho, S. Choi, G. Coppi, N. F. Cothard, K. Coughlin, D. Crichton, K. D. Crowley, K. T. Crowley, A. Cukierman, J. M. D’Ewart, R. Dünner, T. de Haan, M. Devlin, S. Dicker, J. Didier, M. Dobbs, B. Dober, C. J. Duell, S. Duff, A. Duivenvoorden, J. Dunkley, J. Dusatko, J. Errard, G. Fabbian, S. Feeney, S. Ferraro, P. Fluxà, K. Freese, J. C. Frisch, A. Frolov, G. Fuller, B. Fuzia, N. Galitzki, P. A. Gallardo, J. Tomas Galvez Ghersi, J. Gao, E. Gawiser, M. Gerbino, V. Gluscevic, N. Goeckner-Wald, J. Golec, S. Gordon, M. Gralla, D. Green, A. Grigorian, J. Groh, C. Groppi, Y. Guan, J. E. Gudmundsson, D. Han, P. Hargrave, M. Hasegawa, M. Hasselfield, M. Hattori, V. Haynes, M. Hazumi, Y. He, E. Healy, S. W. Henderson, C. Hervias-Caimapo, C. A. Hill, J. C. Hill, G. Hilton, M. Hilton, A. D. Hincks, G. Hinshaw, R. Hložek, S. Ho, S. P. Ho, L. Howe, Z. Huang, J. Hubmayr, K. Huffenberger, J. P. Hughes, A. Ijjas, M. Ikape, K. Irwin, A. H. Jaffe, B. Jain, O. Jeong, D. Kaneko, E. D. Karpel, N. Katayama, B. Keating, S. S. Kernasovskiy, R. Keskitalo, T. Kisner, K. Kiuchi, J. Klein, K. Knowles, B. Koopman, A. Kosowsky, N. Krachmalnicoff, S. E. Kuenstner, C. Kuo, A. Kusaka, J. Lashner, A. Lee, E. Lee, D. Leon, J. S. -Y. Leung, A. Lewis, Y. Li, Z. Li, M. Limon, E. Linder, C. Lopez-Caraballo, T. Louis, L. Lowry, M. Lungu, M. Madhavacheril, D. Mak, F. Maldonado, H. Mani, B. Mates, F. Matsuda, L. Maurin, P. Mauskopf, A. May, N. McCallum, C. McKenney, J. McMahon, P. D. Meerburg, J. Meyers, A. Miller, M. Mirmelstein, K. Moodley, M. Munchmeyer, C. Munson, S. Naess, F. Nati, M. Navaroli, L. Newburgh, H. N. Nguyen, M. Niemack, H. Nishino, J. Orlowski-Scherer, L. Page, B. Partridge, J. Peloton, F. Perrotta, L. Piccirillo, G. Pisano, D. Poletti, R. Puddu, G. Puglisi, C. Raum, C. L. Reichardt, M. Remazeilles, Y. Rephaeli, D. Riechers, F. Rojas, A. Roy, S. Sadeh, Y. Sakurai, M. Salatino, M. Sathyanarayana Rao, E. Schaan, M. Schmittfull, N. Sehgal, and J. Seibert (2019)
The Simons Observatory: science goals and forecasts
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2019
(
2
),
pp. 056
.
External Links:
Document
,
1808.07445
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Aiola, A. Kosowsky, and B. Wang (2015)
Gaussian approximation of peak values in the integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect
.
Phys. Rev. D
91
(
4
),
pp. 043510
.
External Links:
Document
,
1410.6138
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
C. Alcock and B. Paczynski (1979)
An evolution free test for non-zero cosmological constant
.
Nature
281
,
pp. 358
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
R. A. Alpher, H. Bethe, and G. Gamow (1948)
The Origin of Chemical Elements
.
Physical Review
73
(
7
),
pp. 803–804
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
R. A. Alpher and R. Herman (1948)
Evolution of the Universe
.
Nature
162
(
4124
),
pp. 774–775
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Arcari, E. Pinetti, and N. Fornengo (2022)
Got plenty of nothing: cosmic voids as a probe of particle dark matter
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2022
(
11
),
pp. 011
.
External Links:
Document
,
2205.03360
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Aubert, M. Cousinou, S. Escoffier, A. J. Hawken, S. Nadathur, S. Alam, J. Bautista, E. Burtin, C. Chuang, A. de la Macorra, A. de Mattia, H. Gil-Marín, J. Hou, E. Jullo, J. Kneib, R. Neveux, G. Rossi, D. Schneider, A. Smith, A. Tamone, M. Vargas Magaña, and C. Zhao (2022)
The completed SDSS-IV extended Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey: growth rate of structure measurement from cosmic voids
.
MNRAS
513
(
1
),
pp. 186–203
.
External Links:
Document
,
2007.09013
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Baldi and F. Villaescusa-Navarro (2018)
Cosmic degeneracies - II. Structure formation in joint simulations of warm dark matter and f(R) gravity
.
MNRAS
473
(
3
),
pp. 3226–3240
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
A. Barreira, M. Cautun, B. Li, C. M. Baugh, and S. Pascoli (2015)
Weak lensing by voids in modified lensing potentials
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2015
(
8
),
pp. 028–028
.
External Links:
Document
,
1505.05809
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
K. Basu, C. Hernández-Monteagudo, and R. A. Sunyaev (2004)
CMB observations and the production of chemical elements at the end of the dark ages
.
A&A
416
,
pp. 447–466
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0311620
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
A. E. Bayer, F. Villaescusa-Navarro, E. Massara, J. Liu, D. N. Spergel, L. Verde, B. D. Wandelt, M. Viel, and S. Ho (2021)
Detecting Neutrino Mass by Combining Matter Clustering, Halos, and Voids
.
ApJ
919
(
1
),
pp. 24
.
External Links:
Document
,
2102.05049
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
A. E. Bayer, Y. Zhong, Z. Li, J. DeRose, Y. Feng, and J. Liu (2025)
The HalfDome multi-survey cosmological simulations: N-body simulations
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2025
(
5
),
pp. 016
.
External Links:
Document
,
2407.17462
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
C. L. Bennett, N. W. Boggess, E. S. Cheng, M. G. Hauser, T. Kelsall, J. C. Mather, S. H. Moseley, T. L. Murdock, R. A. Shafer, R. F. Silverberg, G. F. Smooth, R. Weiss, and E. L. Wright (1993)
Scientific results from COBE
.
Advances in Space Research
13
(
12
),
pp. 409–423
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
C. L. Bennett, R. S. Hill, G. Hinshaw, M. R. Nolta, N. Odegard, L. Page, D. N. Spergel, J. L. Weiland, E. L. Wright, M. Halpern, N. Jarosik, A. Kogut, M. Limon, S. S. Meyer, G. S. Tucker, and E. Wollack (2003)
First-Year Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Observations: Foreground Emission
.
ApJS
148
(
1
),
pp. 97–117
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0302208
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
A. J. Benson, F. Hoyle, F. Torres, and M. S. Vogeley (2003)
Galaxy voids in cold dark matter universes
.
MNRAS
340
(
1
),
pp. 160–174
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0208257
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
R. Besuner, A. Dey, A. Drlica-Wagner, H. Ebina, G. Fernandez Moroni, S. Ferraro, J. Forero-Romero, K. Honscheid, P. Jelinsky, D. Lang, M. Levi, P. Martini, A. Myers, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, S. Panda, C. Poppett, N. Sailer, D. Schlegel, A. Shafieloo, J. Silber, M. White, T. Abbott, L. Allen, S. Avila, R. Avilés, S. Bailey, A. Bault, M. Bouri, K. Boutsia, E. Burtin, F. Chierchie, W. Coulton, K. Dawson, B. Dey, O. Doré, P. Dunlop, D. Eisenstein, C. Emanuele, S. Escoffier, J. Estrada, P. Fagrelius, K. Fanning, T. Fanning, A. Font-Ribera, J. Frieman, M. Galal, V. Gluscevic, S. G. A. Gontcho, D. Green, G. Gutierrez, J. Guy, K. Hashemi, S. Heathcote, S. Holland, J. Hou, D. Huterer, B. Irigoyen Gimenez, M. Ivanov, R. Joyce, E. Jullo, S. Juneau, C. Juramy, A. Karcher, S. Kent, D. Kirkby, J. Kneib, E. Krause, A. Krolewski, O. Lahav, A. Lapi, A. Leauthaud, M. Lewandowski, T. Li, K. Lin, M. Loverde, S. MacBride, C. Magneville, J. Marshall, P. McDonald, T. Miller, J. Moustakas, M. Münchmeyer, J. Najita, J. Newman, W. Percival, O. Philcox, P. Pires, A. Raichoor, B. Roach, C. Rockosi, M. Rombach, A. Ross, E. Sanchez, L. Schmidt, M. Schubnell, R. Sebok, U. Seljak, E. Silverstein, Z. Slepian, C. Stone, R. Stupak, G. Tarlé, T. Li, L. Tyas, M. Vargas-Magaña, A. Walker, N. Wenner, C. Yèche, Y. Zhang, and R. Zhou (2025)
The Spectroscopic Stage-5 Experiment
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2503.07923
.
External Links:
Document
,
2503.07923
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
R. Biswas, E. Alizadeh, and B. D. Wandelt (2010)
Voids as a precision probe of dark energy
.
Phys. Rev. D
82
(
2
),
pp. 023002
.
External Links:
Document
,
1002.0014
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
E. G. P. Bos, R. van de Weygaert, K. Dolag, and V. Pettorino (2012)
The darkness that shaped the void: dark energy and cosmic voids
.
MNRAS
426
(
1
),
pp. 440–461
.
External Links:
Document
,
1205.4238
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
Y. Cai, M. Neyrinck, Q. Mao, J. A. Peacock, I. Szapudi, and A. A. Berlind (2017a)
The lensing and temperature imprints of voids on the cosmic microwave background
.
MNRAS
466
(
3
),
pp. 3364–3375
.
External Links:
Document
,
1609.00301
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
Y. Cai, M. Neyrinck, Q. Mao, J. A. Peacock, I. Szapudi, and A. A. Berlind (2017b)
The lensing and temperature imprints of voids on the cosmic microwave background
.
MNRAS
466
(
3
),
pp. 3364–3375
.
External Links:
Document
,
1609.00301
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
Y. Cai, N. Padilla, and B. Li (2015)
Testing gravity using cosmic voids
.
MNRAS
451
(
1
),
pp. 1036–1055
.
External Links:
Document
,
1410.1510
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
G. Camacho-Ciurana, P. Lee, N. Arsenov, A. Kovács, I. Szapudi, and I. Csabai (2024)
The cosmic microwave background lensing imprint of cosmic voids detected in the WISE-Pan-STARRS luminous red galaxy catalog
.
A&A
689
,
pp. A171
.
External Links:
Document
,
2312.08483
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
,
§5.1.3
.
C. Carbone, M. Petkova, and K. Dolag (2016)
DEMNUni: ISW, Rees-Sciama, and weak-lensing in the presence of massive neutrinos
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2016
(
7
),
pp. 034
.
External Links:
Document
,
1605.02024
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
footnote 1
.
E. Castorina, C. Carbone, J. Bel, E. Sefusatti, and K. Dolag (2015)
DEMNUni: the clustering of large-scale structures in the presence of massive neutrinos
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2015
(
7
),
pp. 043–043
.
External Links:
Document
,
1505.07148
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
footnote 1
.
M. Cautun, E. Paillas, Y. Cai, S. Bose, J. Armijo, B. Li, and N. Padilla (2018)
The Santiago-Harvard-Edinburgh-Durham void comparison - I. SHEDding light on chameleon gravity tests
.
MNRAS
476
(
3
),
pp. 3195–3217
.
External Links:
Document
,
1710.01730
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
T. Chantavat, U. Sawangwit, P. M. Sutter, and B. D. Wandelt (2016)
Cosmological parameter constraints from CMB lensing with cosmic voids
.
Phys. Rev. D
93
(
4
),
pp. 043523
.
External Links:
Document
,
1409.3364
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
.
T. Chantavat, U. Sawangwit, and B. D. Wandelt (2017)
Void Profile from Planck Lensing Potential Map
.
ApJ
836
(
2
),
pp. 156
.
External Links:
Document
,
1702.01009
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
J. Comparat, J. Kneib, S. Escoffier, J. Zoubian, A. Ealet, F. Lamareille, N. Mostek, O. Steele, E. Aubourg, S. Bailey, A. S. Bolton, J. Brownstein, K. Dawson, J. Ge, O. Ilbert, A. Leauthaud, C. Maraston, W. Percival, N. P. Ross, C. Schimd, D. J. Schlegel, D. P. Schneider, D. Thomas, J. L. Tinker, and B. A. Weaver (2013)
Investigating emission-line galaxy surveys with the Sloan Digital Sky Survey infrastructure
.
MNRAS
428
(
2
),
pp. 1498–1517
.
External Links:
Document
,
1207.4321
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.1
.
S. Contarini, A. Pisani, N. Hamaus, F. Marulli, L. Moscardini, and M. Baldi (2023)
Cosmological Constraints from the BOSS DR12 Void Size Function
.
ApJ
953
(
1
),
pp. 46
.
External Links:
Document
,
2212.03873
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Contarini, T. Ronconi, F. Marulli, L. Moscardini, A. Veropalumbo, and M. Baldi (2019)
Cosmological exploitation of the size function of cosmic voids identified in the distribution of biased tracers
.
MNRAS
488
(
3
),
pp. 3526–3540
.
External Links:
Document
,
1904.01022
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
C. M. Correa, D. J. Paz, N. D. Padilla, A. G. Sánchez, A. N. Ruiz, and R. E. Angulo (2022)
Redshift-space effects in voids and their impact on cosmological tests - II. The void-galaxy cross-correlation function
.
MNRAS
509
(
2
),
pp. 1871–1884
.
External Links:
Document
,
2107.01314
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
Dark Energy Survey Collaboration, T. Abbott, F. B. Abdalla, J. Aleksić, S. Allam, A. Amara, D. Bacon, E. Balbinot, M. Banerji, K. Bechtol, A. Benoit-Lévy, G. M. Bernstein, E. Bertin, J. Blazek, C. Bonnett, S. Bridle, D. Brooks, R. J. Brunner, E. Buckley-Geer, D. L. Burke, G. B. Caminha, D. Capozzi, J. Carlsen, A. Carnero-Rosell, M. Carollo, M. Carrasco-Kind, J. Carretero, F. J. Castander, L. Clerkin, T. Collett, C. Conselice, M. Crocce, C. E. Cunha, C. B. D’Andrea, L. N. da Costa, T. M. Davis, S. Desai, H. T. Diehl, J. P. Dietrich, S. Dodelson, P. Doel, A. Drlica-Wagner, J. Estrada, J. Etherington, A. E. Evrard, J. Fabbri, D. A. Finley, B. Flaugher, R. J. Foley, P. Fosalba, J. Frieman, J. García-Bellido, E. Gaztanaga, D. W. Gerdes, T. Giannantonio, D. A. Goldstein, D. Gruen, R. A. Gruendl, P. Guarnieri, G. Gutierrez, W. Hartley, K. Honscheid, B. Jain, D. J. James, T. Jeltema, S. Jouvel, R. Kessler, A. King, D. Kirk, R. Kron, K. Kuehn, N. Kuropatkin, O. Lahav, T. S. Li, M. Lima, H. Lin, M. A. G. Maia, M. Makler, M. Manera, C. Maraston, J. L. Marshall, P. Martini, R. G. McMahon, P. Melchior, A. Merson, C. J. Miller, R. Miquel, J. J. Mohr, X. Morice-Atkinson, K. Naidoo, E. Neilsen, R. C. Nichol, B. Nord, R. Ogando, F. Ostrovski, A. Palmese, A. Papadopoulos, H. V. Peiris, J. Peoples, W. J. Percival, A. A. Plazas, S. L. Reed, A. Refregier, A. K. Romer, A. Roodman, A. Ross, E. Rozo, E. S. Rykoff, I. Sadeh, M. Sako, C. Sánchez, E. Sanchez, B. Santiago, V. Scarpine, M. Schubnell, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, E. Sheldon, M. Smith, R. C. Smith, M. Soares-Santos, F. Sobreira, M. Soumagnac, E. Suchyta, M. Sullivan, M. Swanson, G. Tarle, J. Thaler, D. Thomas, R. C. Thomas, D. Tucker, J. D. Vieira, V. Vikram, A. R. Walker, R. H. Wechsler, J. Weller, W. Wester, L. Whiteway, H. Wilcox, B. Yanny, Y. Zhang, and J. Zuntz (2016)
The Dark Energy Survey: more than dark energy - an overview
.
MNRAS
460
(
2
),
pp. 1270–1299
.
External Links:
Document
,
1601.00329
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Das, B. D. Sherwin, P. Aguirre, J. W. Appel, J. R. Bond, C. S. Carvalho, M. J. Devlin, J. Dunkley, R. Dünner, T. Essinger-Hileman, J. W. Fowler, A. Hajian, M. Halpern, M. Hasselfield, A. D. Hincks, R. Hlozek, K. M. Huffenberger, J. P. Hughes, K. D. Irwin, J. Klein, A. Kosowsky, R. H. Lupton, T. A. Marriage, D. Marsden, F. Menanteau, K. Moodley, M. D. Niemack, M. R. Nolta, L. A. Page, L. Parker, E. D. Reese, B. L. Schmitt, N. Sehgal, J. Sievers, D. N. Spergel, S. T. Staggs, D. S. Swetz, E. R. Switzer, R. Thornton, K. Visnjic, and E. Wollack (2011)
Detection of the Power Spectrum of Cosmic Microwave Background Lensing by the Atacama Cosmology Telescope
.
Phys. Rev. Lett.
107
(
2
),
pp. 021301
.
External Links:
Document
,
1103.2124
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
K. S. Dawson, D. J. Schlegel, C. P. Ahn, S. F. Anderson, É. Aubourg, S. Bailey, R. H. Barkhouser, J. E. Bautista, A. Beifiori, A. A. Berlind, V. Bhardwaj, D. Bizyaev, C. H. Blake, M. R. Blanton, M. Blomqvist, A. S. Bolton, A. Borde, J. Bovy, W. N. Brandt, H. Brewington, J. Brinkmann, P. J. Brown, J. R. Brownstein, K. Bundy, N. G. Busca, W. Carithers, A. R. Carnero, M. A. Carr, Y. Chen, J. Comparat, N. Connolly, F. Cope, R. A. C. Croft, A. J. Cuesta, L. N. da Costa, J. R. A. Davenport, T. Delubac, R. de Putter, S. Dhital, A. Ealet, G. L. Ebelke, D. J. Eisenstein, S. Escoffier, X. Fan, N. Filiz Ak, H. Finley, A. Font-Ribera, R. Génova-Santos, J. E. Gunn, H. Guo, D. Haggard, P. B. Hall, J. Hamilton, B. Harris, D. W. Harris, S. Ho, D. W. Hogg, D. Holder, K. Honscheid, J. Huehnerhoff, B. Jordan, W. P. Jordan, G. Kauffmann, E. A. Kazin, D. Kirkby, M. A. Klaene, J. Kneib, J. Le Goff, K. Lee, D. C. Long, C. P. Loomis, B. Lundgren, R. H. Lupton, M. A. G. Maia, M. Makler, E. Malanushenko, V. Malanushenko, R. Mandelbaum, M. Manera, C. Maraston, D. Margala, K. L. Masters, C. K. McBride, P. McDonald, I. D. McGreer, R. G. McMahon, O. Mena, J. Miralda-Escudé, A. D. Montero-Dorta, F. Montesano, D. Muna, A. D. Myers, T. Naugle, R. C. Nichol, P. Noterdaeme, S. E. Nuza, M. D. Olmstead, A. Oravetz, D. J. Oravetz, R. Owen, N. Padmanabhan, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, K. Pan, J. K. Parejko, I. Pâris, W. J. Percival, I. Pérez-Fournon, I. Pérez-Ràfols, P. Petitjean, R. Pfaffenberger, J. Pforr, M. M. Pieri, F. Prada, A. M. Price-Whelan, M. J. Raddick, R. Rebolo, J. Rich, G. T. Richards, C. M. Rockosi, N. A. Roe, A. J. Ross, N. P. Ross, G. Rossi, J. A. Rubiño-Martin, L. Samushia, A. G. Sánchez, C. Sayres, S. J. Schmidt, D. P. Schneider, C. G. Scóccola, H. Seo, A. Shelden, E. Sheldon, Y. Shen, Y. Shu, A. Slosar, S. A. Smee, S. A. Snedden, F. Stauffer, O. Steele, M. A. Strauss, A. Streblyanska, N. Suzuki, M. E. C. Swanson, T. Tal, M. Tanaka, D. Thomas, J. L. Tinker, R. Tojeiro, C. A. Tremonti, M. Vargas Magaña, L. Verde, M. Viel, D. A. Wake, M. Watson, B. A. Weaver, D. H. Weinberg, B. J. Weiner, A. A. West, M. White, W. M. Wood-Vasey, C. Yeche, I. Zehavi, G. Zhao, and Z. Zheng (2013)
The Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey of SDSS-III
.
AJ
145
(
1
),
pp. 10
.
External Links:
Document
,
1208.0022
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
G. Degni, E. Sarpa, M. Aubert, E. Branchini, A. Pisani, and H. M. Courtois (2025)
On the extraction of Alcock-Paczynski signal from voids: a novel approach via reconstruction
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2509.08884
.
External Links:
Document
,
2509.08884
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
U. Demirbozan, S. Nadathur, I. Ferrero, P. Fosalba, A. Kovács, R. Miquel, C. T. Davies, S. Pandey, M. Adamow, K. Bechtol, A. Drlica-Wagner, R. A. Gruendl, W. G. Hartley, A. Pieres, A. J. Ross, E. S. Rykoff, E. Sheldon, B. Yanny, T. M. C. Abbott, M. Aguena, S. Allam, O. Alves, D. Bacon, E. Bertin, S. Bocquet, D. Brooks, A. C. Rosell, J. Carretero, R. Cawthon, L. N. da Costa, M. E. S. Pereira, J. De Vicente, S. Desai, P. Doel, S. Everett, B. Flaugher, D. Friedel, J. Frieman, M. Gatti, E. Gaztanaga, G. Giannini, G. Gutierrez, S. R. Hinton, D. L. Hollowood, D. J. James, N. Jeffrey, K. Kuehn, O. Lahav, S. Lee, J. L. Marshall, J. Mena-Fernández, J. J. Mohr, J. Myles, R. L. C. Ogando, A. A. P. Malagón, A. Roodman, E. Sanchez, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, M. Smith, M. Soares-Santos, E. Suchyta, M. E. C. Swanson, G. Tarle, N. Weaverdyck, J. Weller, and P. Wiseman (2024)
The gravitational lensing imprints of DES Y3 superstructures on the CMB: a matched filtering approach
.
MNRAS
534
(
3
),
pp. 2328–2343
.
External Links:
Document
,
2404.18278
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
4th item
,
§5.1.3
,
§5.2.2
.
DESI Collaboration, A. Aghamousa, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, L. E. Allen, C. Allende Prieto, J. Annis, S. Bailey, C. Balland, O. Ballester, C. Baltay, L. Beaufore, C. Bebek, T. C. Beers, E. F. Bell, J. L. Bernal, R. Besuner, F. Beutler, C. Blake, H. Bleuler, M. Blomqvist, R. Blum, A. S. Bolton, C. Briceno, D. Brooks, J. R. Brownstein, E. Buckley-Geer, A. Burden, E. Burtin, N. G. Busca, R. N. Cahn, Y. Cai, L. Cardiel-Sas, R. G. Carlberg, P. Carton, R. Casas, F. J. Castander, J. L. Cervantes-Cota, T. M. Claybaugh, M. Close, C. T. Coker, S. Cole, J. Comparat, A. P. Cooper, M. -C. Cousinou, M. Crocce, J. Cuby, D. P. Cunningham, T. M. Davis, K. S. Dawson, A. de la Macorra, J. De Vicente, T. Delubac, M. Derwent, A. Dey, G. Dhungana, Z. Ding, P. Doel, Y. T. Duan, A. Ealet, J. Edelstein, S. Eftekharzadeh, D. J. Eisenstein, A. Elliott, S. Escoffier, M. Evatt, P. Fagrelius, X. Fan, K. Fanning, A. Farahi, J. Farihi, G. Favole, Y. Feng, E. Fernandez, J. R. Findlay, D. P. Finkbeiner, M. J. Fitzpatrick, B. Flaugher, S. Flender, A. Font-Ribera, J. E. Forero-Romero, P. Fosalba, C. S. Frenk, M. Fumagalli, B. T. Gaensicke, G. Gallo, J. Garcia-Bellido, E. Gaztanaga, N. Pietro Gentile Fusillo, T. Gerard, I. Gershkovich, T. Giannantonio, D. Gillet, G. Gonzalez-de-Rivera, V. Gonzalez-Perez, S. Gott, O. Graur, G. Gutierrez, J. Guy, S. Habib, H. Heetderks, I. Heetderks, K. Heitmann, W. A. Hellwing, D. A. Herrera, S. Ho, S. Holland, K. Honscheid, E. Huff, T. A. Hutchinson, D. Huterer, H. S. Hwang, J. M. Illa Laguna, Y. Ishikawa, D. Jacobs, N. Jeffrey, P. Jelinsky, E. Jennings, L. Jiang, J. Jimenez, J. Johnson, R. Joyce, E. Jullo, S. Juneau, S. Kama, A. Karcher, S. Karkar, R. Kehoe, N. Kennamer, S. Kent, M. Kilbinger, A. G. Kim, D. Kirkby, T. Kisner, E. Kitanidis, J. Kneib, S. Koposov, E. Kovacs, K. Koyama, A. Kremin, R. Kron, L. Kronig, A. Kueter-Young, C. G. Lacey, R. Lafever, O. Lahav, A. Lambert, M. Lampton, M. Landriau, D. Lang, T. R. Lauer, J. Le Goff, L. Le Guillou, A. Le Van Suu, J. H. Lee, S. Lee, D. Leitner, M. Lesser, M. E. Levi, B. L’Huillier, B. Li, M. Liang, H. Lin, E. Linder, S. R. Loebman, Z. Lukić, J. Ma, N. MacCrann, C. Magneville, L. Makarem, M. Manera, C. J. Manser, R. Marshall, P. Martini, R. Massey, T. Matheson, J. McCauley, P. McDonald, I. D. McGreer, A. Meisner, N. Metcalfe, T. N. Miller, R. Miquel, J. Moustakas, A. Myers, M. Naik, J. A. Newman, R. C. Nichol, A. Nicola, L. Nicolati da Costa, J. Nie, G. Niz, P. Norberg, B. Nord, D. Norman, P. Nugent, T. O’Brien, M. Oh, and K. A. G. Olsen (2016)
The DESI Experiment Part I: Science,Targeting, and Survey Design
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:1611.00036
.
External Links:
Document
,
1611.00036
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Dodelson (2003)
Coherent Phase Argument for Inflation
.
In
Neutrinos, Flavor Physics, and Precision Cosmology
,
J. F. Nieves and R. R. Volkas (Eds.)
,
American Institute of Physics Conference Series
, Vol.
689
,
pp. 184–196
.
External Links:
Document
,
hep-ph/0309057
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
F. Dong, Y. Yu, J. Zhang, X. Yang, and P. Zhang (2021)
Measuring the integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect from the low-density regions of the universe
.
MNRAS
500
(
3
),
pp. 3838–3853
.
External Links:
Document
,
2006.14202
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
O. Doré, J. Bock, M. Ashby, P. Capak, A. Cooray, R. de Putter, T. Eifler, N. Flagey, Y. Gong, S. Habib, K. Heitmann, C. Hirata, W. Jeong, R. Katti, P. Korngut, E. Krause, D. Lee, D. Masters, P. Mauskopf, G. Melnick, B. Mennesson, H. Nguyen, K. Öberg, A. Pullen, A. Raccanelli, R. Smith, Y. Song, V. Tolls, S. Unwin, T. Venumadhav, M. Viero, M. Werner, and M. Zemcov (2014)
Cosmology with the SPHEREX All-Sky Spectral Survey
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:1412.4872
.
External Links:
Document
,
1412.4872
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
M. J. Drinkwater, R. J. Jurek, C. Blake, D. Woods, K. A. Pimbblet, K. Glazebrook, R. Sharp, M. B. Pracy, S. Brough, M. Colless, W. J. Couch, S. M. Croom, T. M. Davis, D. Forbes, K. Forster, D. G. Gilbank, M. Gladders, B. Jelliffe, N. Jones, I. -. Li, B. Madore, D. C. Martin, G. B. Poole, T. Small, E. Wisnioski, T. Wyder, and H. K. C. Yee (2010)
The WiggleZ Dark Energy Survey: survey design and first data release
.
MNRAS
401
(
3
),
pp. 1429–1452
.
External Links:
Document
,
0911.4246
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.1
.
T. Eifler, X. Fang, E. Krause, C. M. Hirata, J. Xu, K. Benabed, S. Ferraro, V. Miranda, S. Pranjal R., E. Ayçoberry, and Y. Dubois (2024)
Cosmology from weak lensing, galaxy clustering, CMB lensing and tSZ: II. Optimizing Roman survey design for CMB cross-correlation science
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2411.04088
.
External Links:
Document
,
2411.04088
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§6
.
T. Eifler, M. Simet, E. Krause, C. Hirata, H. Huang, X. Fang, V. Miranda, R. Mandelbaum, C. Doux, C. Heinrich, E. Huff, H. Miyatake, S. Hemmati, J. Xu, P. Rogozenski, P. Capak, A. Choi, O. Doré, B. Jain, M. Jarvis, J. Kruk, N. MacCrann, D. Masters, E. Rozo, D. N. Spergel, M. Troxel, A. von der Linden, Y. Wang, D. H. Weinberg, L. Wenzl, and H. Wu (2021)
Cosmology with the Roman Space Telescope: synergies with the Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time
.
MNRAS
507
(
1
),
pp. 1514–1527
.
External Links:
Document
,
2004.04702
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§6
.
G. Favole, J. Comparat, F. Prada, G. Yepes, E. Jullo, A. Niemiec, J. Kneib, S. A. Rodríguez-Torres, A. Klypin, R. A. Skibba, C. K. McBride, D. J. Eisenstein, D. J. Schlegel, S. E. Nuza, C. Chuang, T. Delubac, C. Yèche, and D. P. Schneider (2016)
Clustering properties of g-selected galaxies at z
∼
\sim
0.8
.
MNRAS
461
(
4
),
pp. 3421–3431
.
External Links:
Document
,
1507.04356
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.1
.
E. Fernández-García, J. E. Betancort-Rijo, F. Prada, T. Ishiyama, A. Klypin, and J. Ereza (2025)
Constraining cosmological parameters using void statistics from the SDSS survey
.
A&A
695
,
pp. A19
.
External Links:
Document
,
2406.13736
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
B. Flaugher (2005)
The Dark Energy Survey
.
International Journal of Modern Physics A
20
(
14
),
pp. 3121–3123
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Flender, S. Hotchkiss, and S. Nadathur (2013)
The stacked ISW signal of rare superstructures in
Λ
\Lambda
CDM
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2013
(
2
),
pp. 013
.
External Links:
Document
,
1212.0776
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. R. Furlanetto and T. Piran (2006)
The evidence of absence: galaxy voids in the excursion set formalism
.
MNRAS
366
(
2
),
pp. 467–479
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0509148
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
G. Gamow (1946)
Expanding Universe and the Origin of Elements
.
Physical Review
70
(
7-8
),
pp. 572–573
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
G. Gamow (1948)
The Origin of Elements and the Separation of Galaxies
.
Physical Review
74
(
4
),
pp. 505–506
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
V. Gonzalez-Perez, W. Cui, S. Contreras, C. M. Baugh, J. Comparat, A. J. Griffin, J. Helly, A. Knebe, C. Lacey, and P. Norberg (2020)
Do model emission line galaxies live in filaments at z
∼
\sim
1?
.
MNRAS
498
(
2
),
pp. 1852–1870
.
External Links:
Document
,
2001.06560
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.1
,
§3.1
.
K. M. Górski, E. Hivon, A. J. Banday, B. D. Wandelt, F. K. Hansen, M. Reinecke, and M. Bartelmann (2005)
HEALPix: A Framework for High-Resolution Discretization and Fast Analysis of Data Distributed on the Sphere
.
ApJ
622
(
2
),
pp. 759–771
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0409513
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
1st item
.
B. R. Granett, A. Kovács, and A. J. Hawken (2015)
The integrated Sachs-Wolfe signal from BOSS superstructures
.
MNRAS
454
(
3
),
pp. 2804–2814
.
External Links:
Document
,
1507.03914
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
B. R. Granett, M. C. Neyrinck, and I. Szapudi (2008)
An Imprint of Superstructures on the Microwave Background due to the Integrated Sachs-Wolfe Effect
.
ApJ
683
(
2
),
pp. L99
.
External Links:
Document
,
0805.3695
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. A. Gregory and L. A. Thompson (1978)
The Coma/A1367 supercluster and its environs.
.
ApJ
222
,
pp. 784–799
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
L. Guzzo, M. Scodeggio, B. Garilli, B. R. Granett, A. Fritz, U. Abbas, C. Adami, S. Arnouts, J. Bel, M. Bolzonella, D. Bottini, E. Branchini, A. Cappi, J. Coupon, O. Cucciati, I. Davidzon, G. De Lucia, S. de la Torre, P. Franzetti, M. Fumana, P. Hudelot, O. Ilbert, A. Iovino, J. Krywult, V. Le Brun, O. Le Fèvre, D. Maccagni, K. Małek, F. Marulli, H. J. McCracken, L. Paioro, J. A. Peacock, M. Polletta, A. Pollo, H. Schlagenhaufer, L. A. M. Tasca, R. Tojeiro, D. Vergani, G. Zamorani, A. Zanichelli, A. Burden, C. Di Porto, A. Marchetti, C. Marinoni, Y. Mellier, L. Moscardini, R. C. Nichol, W. J. Percival, S. Phleps, and M. Wolk (2014)
The VIMOS Public Extragalactic Redshift Survey (VIPERS). An unprecedented view of galaxies and large-scale structure at 0.5 ¡ z ¡ 1.2
.
A&A
566
,
pp. A108
.
External Links:
Document
,
1303.2623
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Habouzit, A. Pisani, A. Goulding, Y. Dubois, R. S. Somerville, and J. E. Greene (2020)
Properties of simulated galaxies and supermassive black holes in cosmic voids
.
MNRAS
493
(
1
),
pp. 899–921
.
External Links:
Document
,
1912.06662
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
B. Hadzhiyska, S. Bose, D. Eisenstein, L. Hernquist, and D. N. Spergel (2020)
Limitations to the ‘basic’ HOD model and beyond
.
MNRAS
493
(
4
),
pp. 5506–5519
.
External Links:
Document
,
1911.02610
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.1
.
N. Hamaus, M. Aubert, A. Pisani, S. Contarini, G. Verza, M. -C. Cousinou, S. Escoffier, A. Hawken, G. Lavaux, G. Pollina, B. D. Wandelt, J. Weller, M. Bonici, C. Carbone, L. Guzzo, A. Kovacs, F. Marulli, E. Massara, L. Moscardini, P. Ntelis, W. J. Percival, S. Radinović, M. Sahlén, Z. Sakr, A. G. Sánchez, H. A. Winther, N. Auricchio, S. Awan, R. Bender, C. Bodendorf, D. Bonino, E. Branchini, M. Brescia, J. Brinchmann, V. Capobianco, J. Carretero, F. J. Castander, M. Castellano, S. Cavuoti, A. Cimatti, R. Cledassou, G. Congedo, L. Conversi, Y. Copin, L. Corcione, M. Cropper, A. Da Silva, H. Degaudenzi, M. Douspis, F. Dubath, C. A. J. Duncan, X. Dupac, S. Dusini, A. Ealet, S. Ferriol, P. Fosalba, M. Frailis, E. Franceschi, P. Franzetti, M. Fumana, B. Garilli, B. Gillis, C. Giocoli, A. Grazian, F. Grupp, S. V. H. Haugan, W. Holmes, F. Hormuth, K. Jahnke, S. Kermiche, A. Kiessling, M. Kilbinger, T. Kitching, M. Kümmel, M. Kunz, H. Kurki-Suonio, S. Ligori, P. B. Lilje, I. Lloro, E. Maiorano, O. Marggraf, K. Markovic, R. Massey, S. Maurogordato, M. Melchior, M. Meneghetti, G. Meylan, M. Moresco, E. Munari, S. M. Niemi, C. Padilla, S. Paltani, F. Pasian, K. Pedersen, V. Pettorino, S. Pires, M. Poncet, L. Popa, L. Pozzetti, R. Rebolo, J. Rhodes, H. Rix, M. Roncarelli, E. Rossetti, R. Saglia, P. Schneider, A. Secroun, G. Seidel, S. Serrano, C. Sirignano, G. Sirri, J. -L. Starck, P. Tallada-Crespí, D. Tavagnacco, A. N. Taylor, I. Tereno, R. Toledo-Moreo, F. Torradeflot, E. A. Valentijn, L. Valenziano, Y. Wang, N. Welikala, G. Zamorani, J. Zoubian, S. Andreon, M. Baldi, S. Camera, S. Mei, C. Neissner, and E. Romelli (2022)
Euclid: Forecasts from redshift-space distortions and the Alcock-Paczynski test with cosmic voids
.
A&A
658
,
pp. A20
.
External Links:
Document
,
2108.10347
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
N. Hamaus, P. M. Sutter, G. Lavaux, and B. D. Wandelt (2015)
Probing cosmology and gravity with redshift-space distortions around voids
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2015
(
11
),
pp. 036–036
.
External Links:
Document
,
1507.04363
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
Q. Hang, S. Alam, Y. Cai, and J. A. Peacock (2021a)
Stacked CMB lensing and ISW signals around superstructures in the DESI Legacy Survey
.
MNRAS
507
(
1
),
pp. 510–523
.
External Links:
Document
,
2105.11936
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
.
Q. Hang, S. Alam, Y. Cai, and J. A. Peacock (2021b)
Stacked CMB lensing and ISW signals around superstructures in the DESI Legacy Survey
.
MNRAS
507
(
1
),
pp. 510–523
.
External Links:
Document
,
2105.11936
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
F. K. Hansen, D. Garcia Lambas, A. N. Ruiz, F. Toscano, and L. A. Pereyra (2025)
Evidence for a sign change of the ISW effect in the very recent universe: hot voids and cold overdensities at
z
<
0.03
z<0.03
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2506.08832
.
External Links:
Document
,
2506.08832
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
J. Hartlap, P. Simon, and P. Schneider (2007)
Why your model parameter confidences might be too optimistic. Unbiased estimation of the inverse covariance matrix
.
A&A
464
(
1
),
pp. 399–404
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0608064
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§4.3
.
C. Hernández-Monteagudo, J. A. Rubiño-Martín, and R. A. Sunyaev (2007)
On the influence of resonant scattering on cosmic microwave background polarization anisotropies
.
MNRAS
380
(
4
),
pp. 1656–1668
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
C. Hernández-Monteagudo and R. E. Smith (2013)
On the signature of z
∼
\sim
0.6 superclusters and voids in the Integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect
.
MNRAS
435
(
2
),
pp. 1094–1107
.
External Links:
Document
,
1212.1174
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
C. Hernández-Monteagudo, L. Verde, and R. Jimenez (2006)
Tomography of the Reionization Epoch with Multifrequency CMB Observations
.
ApJ
653
(
1
),
pp. 1–10
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0604324
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Hotchkiss, S. Nadathur, S. Gottlöber, I. T. Iliev, A. Knebe, W. A. Watson, and G. Yepes (2015)
The Jubilee ISW Project - II. Observed and simulated imprints of voids and superclusters on the cosmic microwave background
.
MNRAS
446
(
2
),
pp. 1321–1334
.
External Links:
Document
,
1405.3552
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Ilić, M. Langer, and M. Douspis (2013)
Detecting the integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect with stacked voids
.
A&A
556
,
pp. A51
.
External Links:
Document
,
1301.5849
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
Ž. Ivezić, S. M. Kahn, J. A. Tyson, B. Abel, E. Acosta, R. Allsman, D. Alonso, Y. AlSayyad, S. F. Anderson, J. Andrew, J. R. P. Angel, G. Z. Angeli, R. Ansari, P. Antilogus, C. Araujo, R. Armstrong, K. T. Arndt, P. Astier, É. Aubourg, N. Auza, T. S. Axelrod, D. J. Bard, J. D. Barr, A. Barrau, J. G. Bartlett, A. E. Bauer, B. J. Bauman, S. Baumont, E. Bechtol, K. Bechtol, A. C. Becker, J. Becla, C. Beldica, S. Bellavia, F. B. Bianco, R. Biswas, G. Blanc, J. Blazek, R. D. Blandford, J. S. Bloom, J. Bogart, T. W. Bond, M. T. Booth, A. W. Borgland, K. Borne, J. F. Bosch, D. Boutigny, C. A. Brackett, A. Bradshaw, W. N. Brandt, M. E. Brown, J. S. Bullock, P. Burchat, D. L. Burke, G. Cagnoli, D. Calabrese, S. Callahan, A. L. Callen, J. L. Carlin, E. L. Carlson, S. Chandrasekharan, G. Charles-Emerson, S. Chesley, E. C. Cheu, H. Chiang, J. Chiang, C. Chirino, D. Chow, D. R. Ciardi, C. F. Claver, J. Cohen-Tanugi, J. J. Cockrum, R. Coles, A. J. Connolly, K. H. Cook, A. Cooray, K. R. Covey, C. Cribbs, W. Cui, R. Cutri, P. N. Daly, S. F. Daniel, F. Daruich, G. Daubard, G. Daues, W. Dawson, F. Delgado, A. Dellapenna, R. de Peyster, M. de Val-Borro, S. W. Digel, P. Doherty, R. Dubois, G. P. Dubois-Felsmann, J. Durech, F. Economou, T. Eifler, M. Eracleous, B. L. Emmons, A. Fausti Neto, H. Ferguson, E. Figueroa, M. Fisher-Levine, W. Focke, M. D. Foss, J. Frank, M. D. Freemon, E. Gangler, E. Gawiser, J. C. Geary, P. Gee, M. Geha, C. J. B. Gessner, R. R. Gibson, D. K. Gilmore, T. Glanzman, W. Glick, T. Goldina, D. A. Goldstein, I. Goodenow, M. L. Graham, W. J. Gressler, P. Gris, L. P. Guy, A. Guyonnet, G. Haller, R. Harris, P. A. Hascall, J. Haupt, F. Hernandez, S. Herrmann, E. Hileman, J. Hoblitt, J. A. Hodgson, C. Hogan, J. D. Howard, D. Huang, M. E. Huffer, P. Ingraham, W. R. Innes, S. H. Jacoby, B. Jain, F. Jammes, M. J. Jee, T. Jenness, G. Jernigan, D. Jevremović, K. Johns, A. S. Johnson, M. W. G. Johnson, R. L. Jones, C. Juramy-Gilles, M. Jurić, J. S. Kalirai, N. J. Kallivayalil, B. Kalmbach, J. P. Kantor, P. Karst, M. M. Kasliwal, H. Kelly, R. Kessler, V. Kinnison, D. Kirkby, L. Knox, I. V. Kotov, V. L. Krabbendam, K. S. Krughoff, P. Kubánek, J. Kuczewski, S. Kulkarni, J. Ku, N. R. Kurita, C. S. Lage, R. Lambert, T. Lange, J. B. Langton, L. Le Guillou, D. Levine, M. Liang, K. Lim, C. J. Lintott, K. E. Long, M. Lopez, P. J. Lotz, R. H. Lupton, N. B. Lust, L. A. MacArthur, A. Mahabal, R. Mandelbaum, T. W. Markiewicz, D. S. Marsh, P. J. Marshall, S. Marshall, M. May, R. McKercher, M. McQueen, J. Meyers, M. Migliore, M. Miller, and D. J. Mills (2019)
LSST: From Science Drivers to Reference Design and Anticipated Data Products
.
ApJ
873
(
2
),
pp. 111
.
External Links:
Document
,
0805.2366
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
N. Jeffrey, L. Whiteway, M. Gatti, J. Williamson, J. Alsing, A. Porredon, J. Prat, C. Doux, B. Jain, C. Chang, T. -Y. Cheng, T. Kacprzak, P. Lemos, A. Alarcon, A. Amon, K. Bechtol, M. R. Becker, G. M. Bernstein, A. Campos, A. Carnero Rosell, R. Chen, A. Choi, J. DeRose, A. Drlica-Wagner, K. Eckert, S. Everett, A. Ferté, D. Gruen, R. A. Gruendl, K. Herner, M. Jarvis, J. McCullough, J. Myles, A. Navarro-Alsina, S. Pandey, M. Raveri, R. P. Rollins, E. S. Rykoff, C. Sánchez, L. F. Secco, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, E. Sheldon, T. Shin, M. A. Troxel, I. Tutusaus, T. N. Varga, B. Yanny, B. Yin, J. Zuntz, M. Aguena, S. S. Allam, O. Alves, D. Bacon, S. Bocquet, D. Brooks, L. N. da Costa, T. M. Davis, J. De Vicente, S. Desai, H. T. Diehl, I. Ferrero, J. Frieman, J. García-Bellido, E. Gaztanaga, G. Giannini, G. Gutierrez, S. R. Hinton, D. L. Hollowood, K. Honscheid, D. Huterer, D. J. James, O. Lahav, S. Lee, J. L. Marshall, J. Mena-Fernández, R. Miquel, A. Pieres, A. A. Plazas Malagón, A. Roodman, M. Sako, E. Sanchez, D. Sanchez Cid, M. Smith, E. Suchyta, M. E. C. Swanson, G. Tarle, D. L. Tucker, N. Weaverdyck, J. Weller, P. Wiseman, and M. Yamamoto (2025)
Dark energy survey year 3 results: likelihood-free, simulation-based wCDM inference with neural compression of weak-lensing map statistics
.
MNRAS
536
(
2
),
pp. 1303–1322
.
External Links:
Document
,
2403.02314
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
footnote 1
.
E. Jennings, Y. Li, and W. Hu (2013)
The abundance of voids and the excursion set formalism
.
MNRAS
434
(
3
),
pp. 2167–2181
.
External Links:
Document
,
1304.6087
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Jõeveer, J. Einasto, and E. Tago (1978)
Spatial distribution of galaxies and of clusters of galaxies in the southern galactic hemisphere
.
MNRAS
185
,
pp. 357–370
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
N. Kaiser, J. L. Tonry, and G. A. Luppino (2000)
A New Strategy for Deep Wide-Field High-Resolution Optical Imaging
.
PASP
112
(
772
),
pp. 768–800
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/9912181
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
N. Kaiser (1987)
Clustering in real space and in redshift space
.
MNRAS
227
,
pp. 1–21
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
A. Kovács, R. Beck, I. Szapudi, I. Csabai, G. Rácz, and L. Dobos (2020)
A common explanation of the Hubble tension and anomalous cold spots in the CMB
.
MNRAS
499
(
1
),
pp. 320–333
.
External Links:
Document
,
2004.02937
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.1.4
.
A. Kovács, C. Sánchez, J. García-Bellido, J. Elvin-Poole, N. Hamaus, V. Miranda, S. Nadathur, T. Abbott, F. B. Abdalla, J. Annis, S. Avila, E. Bertin, D. Brooks, D. L. Burke, A. Carnero Rosell, M. Carrasco Kind, J. Carretero, R. Cawthon, M. Crocce, C. Cunha, L. N. da Costa, C. Davis, J. De Vicente, D. DePoy, S. Desai, H. T. Diehl, P. Doel, E. Fernandez, B. Flaugher, P. Fosalba, J. Frieman, E. Gaztañaga, D. Gerdes, R. Gruendl, G. Gutierrez, W. Hartley, D. L. Hollowood, K. Honscheid, B. Hoyle, D. J. James, E. Krause, K. Kuehn, N. Kuropatkin, O. Lahav, M. Lima, M. Maia, M. March, J. Marshall, P. Melchior, F. Menanteau, C. J. Miller, R. Miquel, J. Mohr, A. A. Plazas, K. Romer, E. Rykoff, E. Sanchez, V. Scarpine, R. Schindler, M. Schubnell, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, M. Smith, R. C. Smith, M. Soares-Santos, F. Sobreira, E. Suchyta, M. Swanson, G. Tarle, D. Thomas, V. Vikram, J. Weller, and DES Collaboration (2019)
More out of less: an excess integrated Sachs-Wolfe signal from supervoids mapped out by the Dark Energy Survey
.
MNRAS
484
(
4
),
pp. 5267–5277
.
External Links:
Document
,
1811.07812
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
A. Kovács, P. Vielzeuf, I. Ferrero, P. Fosalba, U. Demirbozan, R. Miquel, C. Chang, N. Hamaus, G. Pollina, K. Bechtol, M. Becker, A. Carnero Rosell, M. Carrasco Kind, R. Cawthon, M. Crocce, A. Drlica-Wagner, J. Elvin-Poole, M. Gatti, G. Giannini, R. A. Gruendl, A. Porredon, A. J. Ross, E. S. Rykoff, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, E. Sheldon, B. Yanny, T. Abbott, M. Aguena, S. Allam, J. Annis, D. Bacon, G. Bernstein, E. Bertin, S. Bocquet, D. Brooks, D. Burke, J. Carretero, F. J. Castander, M. Costanzi, L. N. da Costa, M. E. S. Pereira, J. De Vicente, S. Desai, H. T. Diehl, J. Dietrich, A. Ferté, B. Flaugher, J. Frieman, J. Garcia-Bellido, E. Gaztañaga, D. Gerdes, T. Giannantonio, D. Gruen, J. Gschwend, G. Gutierrez, S. Hinton, D. L. Hollowood, K. Honscheid, D. Huterer, K. Kuehn, O. Lahav, M. Lima, M. March, J. Marshall, P. Melchior, F. Menanteau, R. Morgan, J. Muir, R. Ogando, A. Palmese, F. Paz-Chinchon, A. Pieres, A. Plazas Malagón, M. Rodriguez Monroy, A. Roodman, E. Sanchez, M. Schubnell, S. Serrano, M. Smith, E. Suchyta, G. Tarle, D. Thomas, C. -H. To, T. N. Varga, J. Weller, and DES Collaboration (2022)
Dark Energy Survey Year 3 results: Imprints of cosmic voids and superclusters in the Planck CMB lensing map
.
MNRAS
515
(
3
),
pp. 4417–4429
.
External Links:
Document
,
2203.11306
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
,
§4
.
A. Kovács (2018)
The part and the whole: voids, supervoids, and their ISW imprint
.
MNRAS
475
(
2
),
pp. 1777–1790
.
External Links:
Document
,
1701.08583
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
E. Krause, T. Chang, O. Doré, and K. Umetsu (2013)
The Weight of Emptiness: The Gravitational Lensing Signal of Stacked Voids
.
ApJ
762
(
2
),
pp. L20
.
External Links:
Document
,
1210.2446
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§4.1
.
K. Kreckel, E. Platen, M. A. Aragón-Calvo, J. H. van Gorkom, R. van de Weygaert, J. M. van der Hulst, and B. Beygu (2012)
The Void Galaxy Survey: Optical Properties and H I Morphology and Kinematics
.
AJ
144
(
1
),
pp. 16
.
External Links:
Document
,
1204.5185
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
C. D. Kreisch, A. Pisani, C. Carbone, J. Liu, A. J. Hawken, E. Massara, D. N. Spergel, and B. D. Wandelt (2019)
Massive neutrinos leave fingerprints on cosmic voids
.
MNRAS
488
(
3
),
pp. 4413–4426
.
External Links:
Document
,
1808.07464
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
R. Laureijs, J. Amiaux, S. Arduini, J. -L. Auguères, J. Brinchmann, R. Cole, M. Cropper, C. Dabin, L. Duvet, A. Ealet, B. Garilli, P. Gondoin, L. Guzzo, J. Hoar, H. Hoekstra, R. Holmes, T. Kitching, T. Maciaszek, Y. Mellier, F. Pasian, W. Percival, J. Rhodes, G. Saavedra Criado, M. Sauvage, R. Scaramella, L. Valenziano, S. Warren, R. Bender, F. Castander, A. Cimatti, O. Le Fèvre, H. Kurki-Suonio, M. Levi, P. Lilje, G. Meylan, R. Nichol, K. Pedersen, V. Popa, R. Rebolo Lopez, H. -W. Rix, H. Rottgering, W. Zeilinger, F. Grupp, P. Hudelot, R. Massey, M. Meneghetti, L. Miller, S. Paltani, S. Paulin-Henriksson, S. Pires, C. Saxton, T. Schrabback, G. Seidel, J. Walsh, N. Aghanim, L. Amendola, J. Bartlett, C. Baccigalupi, J. -P. Beaulieu, K. Benabed, J. -G. Cuby, D. Elbaz, P. Fosalba, G. Gavazzi, A. Helmi, I. Hook, M. Irwin, J. -P. Kneib, M. Kunz, F. Mannucci, L. Moscardini, C. Tao, R. Teyssier, J. Weller, G. Zamorani, M. R. Zapatero Osorio, O. Boulade, J. J. Foumond, A. Di Giorgio, P. Guttridge, A. James, M. Kemp, J. Martignac, A. Spencer, D. Walton, T. Blümchen, C. Bonoli, F. Bortoletto, C. Cerna, L. Corcione, C. Fabron, K. Jahnke, S. Ligori, F. Madrid, L. Martin, G. Morgante, T. Pamplona, E. Prieto, M. Riva, R. Toledo, M. Trifoglio, F. Zerbi, F. Abdalla, M. Douspis, C. Grenet, S. Borgani, R. Bouwens, F. Courbin, J. -M. Delouis, P. Dubath, A. Fontana, M. Frailis, A. Grazian, J. Koppenhöfer, O. Mansutti, M. Melchior, M. Mignoli, J. Mohr, C. Neissner, K. Noddle, M. Poncet, M. Scodeggio, S. Serrano, N. Shane, J. -L. Starck, C. Surace, A. Taylor, G. Verdoes-Kleijn, C. Vuerli, O. R. Williams, A. Zacchei, B. Altieri, I. Escudero Sanz, R. Kohley, T. Oosterbroek, P. Astier, D. Bacon, S. Bardelli, C. Baugh, F. Bellagamba, C. Benoist, D. Bianchi, A. Biviano, E. Branchini, C. Carbone, V. Cardone, D. Clements, S. Colombi, C. Conselice, G. Cresci, N. Deacon, J. Dunlop, C. Fedeli, F. Fontanot, P. Franzetti, C. Giocoli, J. Garcia-Bellido, J. Gow, A. Heavens, P. Hewett, C. Heymans, A. Holland, Z. Huang, O. Ilbert, B. Joachimi, E. Jennins, E. Kerins, A. Kiessling, D. Kirk, R. Kotak, O. Krause, O. Lahav, F. van Leeuwen, J. Lesgourgues, M. Lombardi, M. Magliocchetti, K. Maguire, E. Majerotto, R. Maoli, F. Marulli, S. Maurogordato, H. McCracken, R. McLure, A. Melchiorri, A. Merson, M. Moresco, M. Nonino, P. Norberg, J. Peacock, R. Pello, M. Penny, V. Pettorino, C. Di Porto, L. Pozzetti, C. Quercellini, M. Radovich, A. Rassat, N. Roche, S. Ronayette, and E. Rossetti (2011)
Euclid Definition Study Report
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:1110.3193
.
External Links:
Document
,
1110.3193
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
G. Lavaux and B. D. Wandelt (2012)
Precision Cosmography with Stacked Voids
.
ApJ
754
(
2
),
pp. 109
.
External Links:
Document
,
1110.0345
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
A. Lewis and A. Challinor (2006)
Weak gravitational lensing of the CMB
.
Phys. Rep
429
(
1
),
pp. 1–65
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0601594
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
A. Lewis (2013)
Rayleigh scattering: blue sky thinking for future CMB observations
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2013
(
8
),
pp. 053
.
External Links:
Document
,
1307.8148
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
V. Mainieri, R. I. Anderson, J. Brinchmann, A. Cimatti, R. S. Ellis, V. Hill, J. Kneib, A. F. McLeod, C. Opitom, M. M. Roth, P. Sanchez-Saez, R. Smiljanic, E. Tolstoy, R. Bacon, S. Randich, A. Adamo, F. Annibali, P. Arevalo, M. Audard, S. Barsanti, G. Battaglia, A. M. Bayo Aran, F. Belfiore, M. Bellazzini, E. Bellini, M. T. Beltran, L. Berni, S. Bianchi, K. Biazzo, S. Bisero, S. Bisogni, J. Bland-Hawthorn, S. Blondin, J. Bodensteiner, H. M. J. Boffin, R. Bonito, G. Bono, N. F. Bouche, D. Bowman, V. F. Braga, A. Bragaglia, M. Branchesi, A. Brucalassi, J. J. Bryant, I. Bryson, I. Busa, S. Camera, C. Carbone, G. Casali, M. Casali, V. Casasola, N. Castro, M. Catelan, L. Cavallo, C. Chiappini, M. Cioni, M. Colless, L. Colzi, S. Contarini, W. Couch, F. D’Ammando, W. d’Assignies D., V. D’Orazi, R. da Silva, M. G. Dainotti, F. Damiani, C. Danielski, A. De Cia, R. S. de Jong, S. Dhawan, P. Dierickx, S. P. Driver, U. Dupletsa, S. Escoffier, A. Escorza, M. Fabrizio, G. Fiorentino, A. Fontana, F. Fontani, D. Forero Sanchez, P. Franois, F. J. Galindo-Guil, A. R. Gallazzi, D. Galli, M. Garcia, J. Garcia-Rojas, B. Garilli, R. Grand, M. G. Guarcello, N. Hazra, A. Helmi, A. Herrero, D. Iglesias, D. Ilic, V. Irsic, V. D. Ivanov, L. Izzo, P. Jablonka, B. Joachimi, D. Kakkad, S. Kamann, S. Koposov, G. Kordopatis, A. B. Kovacevic, K. Kraljic, H. Kuncarayakti, Y. Kwon, F. La Forgia, O. Lahav, C. Laigle, M. Lazzarin, R. Leaman, F. Leclercq, K. Lee, D. Lee, M. D. Lehnert, P. Lira, E. Loffredo, S. Lucatello, L. Magrini, K. Maguire, G. Mahler, F. Zahra Majidi, N. Malavasi, F. Mannucci, M. Marconi, N. Martin, F. Marulli, D. Massari, T. Matsuno, J. Mattheee, S. McGee, J. Merc, T. Merle, A. Miglio, A. Migliorini, I. Minchev, D. Minniti, N. Miret-Roig, A. Monreal Ibero, F. Montano, B. T. Montet, M. Moresco, C. Moretti, L. Moscardini, A. Moya, O. Mueller, T. Nanayakkara, M. Nicholl, T. Nordlander, F. Onori, M. Padovani, A. F. Pala, S. Panda, M. Pandey-Pommier, L. Pasquini, M. Pawlak, P. J. Pessi, A. Pisani, L. C. Popovic, L. Prisinzano, R. Raddi, M. Rainer, A. Rebassa-Mansergas, J. Richard, M. Rigault, A. Rocher, D. Romano, P. Rosati, G. Sacco, R. Sanchez-Janssen, A. A. C. Sander, J. L. Sanders, M. Sargent, E. Sarpa, C. Schimd, P. Schipani, E. Sefusatti, G. P. Smith, L. Spina, M. Steinmetz, S. Tacchella, G. Tautvaisiene, C. Theissen, G. Thomas, Y. Ting, T. Travouillon, L. Tresse, O. Trivedi, M. Tsantaki, M. Tsedrik, T. Urrutia, E. Valenti, M. Van der Swaelmen, S. Van Eck, F. Verdiani, A. Verdier, S. D. Vergani, A. Verhamme, and J. Vernet (2024)
The Wide-field Spectroscopic Telescope (WST) Science White Paper
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2403.05398
.
External Links:
Document
,
2403.05398
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
E. Massara, F. Villaescusa-Navarro, M. Viel, and P. M. Sutter (2015)
Voids in massive neutrino cosmologies
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2015
(
11
),
pp. 018–018
.
External Links:
Document
,
1506.03088
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Nadathur, P. M. Carter, W. J. Percival, H. A. Winther, and J. E. Bautista (2019)
Beyond BAO: Improving cosmological constraints from BOSS data with measurement of the void-galaxy cross-correlation
.
Phys. Rev. D
100
(
2
),
pp. 023504
.
External Links:
Document
,
1904.01030
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Nadathur and R. Crittenden (2016)
A Detection of the Integrated Sachs-Wolfe Imprint of Cosmic Superstructures Using a Matched-filter Approach
.
ApJ
830
(
1
),
pp. L19
.
External Links:
Document
,
1608.08638
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.1.4
.
S. Nadathur, S. Hotchkiss, and R. Crittenden (2017)
Tracing the gravitational potential using cosmic voids
.
MNRAS
467
(
4
),
pp. 4067–4079
.
External Links:
Document
,
1610.08382
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.1.2
,
§5.1.2
.
S. Nadathur, S. Hotchkiss, and S. Sarkar (2012)
The integrated Sachs-Wolfe imprint of cosmic superstructures: a problem for
Λ
\Lambda
CDM
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2012
(
6
),
pp. 042
.
External Links:
Document
,
1109.4126
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
M. C. Neyrinck (2008)
ZOBOV: a parameter-free void-finding algorithm
.
MNRAS
386
(
4
),
pp. 2101–2109
.
External Links:
Document
,
0712.3049
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§2.1
.
R. Observations Time Allocation Committee and C. Community Survey Definition Committees (2025)
Roman Observations Time Allocation Committee: Final Report and Recommendations
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2505.10574
.
External Links:
Document
,
2505.10574
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§2.1
,
footnote 3
.
Y. Omori (2024)
AGORA: Multicomponent simulation for cross-survey science
.
MNRAS
530
(
4
),
pp. 5030–5068
.
External Links:
Document
,
2212.07420
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§2.1
,
§2.2
.
E. Paillas, M. Cautun, B. Li, Y. Cai, N. Padilla, J. Armijo, and S. Bose (2019)
The Santiago-Harvard-Edinburgh-Durham void comparison II: unveiling the Vainshtein screening using weak lensing
.
MNRAS
484
(
1
),
pp. 1149–1165
.
External Links:
Document
,
1810.02864
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§6
.
P. Pápai, I. Szapudi, and B. R. Granett (2011)
Integrated Sachs-Wolfe Imprint of Superstructures on Linear Scales
.
ApJ
732
(
1
),
pp. 27
.
External Links:
Document
,
1012.3750
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
P. J. E. Peebles (2020)
Cosmology’s Century: An Inside History of our Modern Understanding of the Universe
.
Princeton University Press
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
A. A. Penzias and R. W. Wilson (1965)
A Measurement of Excess Antenna Temperature at 4080 Mc/s.
.
ApJ
142
,
pp. 419–421
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Pérez Sar, C. Hernández Monteagudo, A. Kovács, and A. Pisani (2025)
Towards precision cosmology with Voids x CMB correlations (I): Roman-Agora mock catalogs and pipeline validation
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2512.25040
.
External Links:
Document
,
2512.25040
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
Appendix A
,
Appendix B
,
Appendix F
,
§2.1
,
§2.1
,
§2.2
,
§5.1.1
,
§5.1
,
§6
.
A. Pisani, P. M. Sutter, N. Hamaus, E. Alizadeh, R. Biswas, B. D. Wandelt, and C. M. Hirata (2015)
Counting voids to probe dark energy
.
Phys. Rev. D
92
(
8
),
pp. 083531
.
External Links:
Document
,
1503.07690
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
Planck Collaboration, P. A. R. Ade, N. Aghanim, C. Armitage-Caplan, M. Arnaud, M. Ashdown, F. Atrio-Barandela, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi, A. J. Banday, R. B. Barreiro, J. G. Bartlett, S. Basak, E. Battaner, K. Benabed, A. Benoît, A. Benoit-Lévy, J. -P. Bernard, M. Bersanelli, P. Bielewicz, J. Bobin, J. J. Bock, A. Bonaldi, L. Bonavera, J. R. Bond, J. Borrill, F. R. Bouchet, M. Bridges, M. Bucher, C. Burigana, R. C. Butler, J. -F. Cardoso, A. Catalano, A. Challinor, A. Chamballu, H. C. Chiang, L. -Y. Chiang, P. R. Christensen, S. Church, D. L. Clements, S. Colombi, L. P. L. Colombo, F. Couchot, A. Coulais, B. P. Crill, A. Curto, F. Cuttaia, L. Danese, R. D. Davies, R. J. Davis, P. de Bernardis, A. de Rosa, G. de Zotti, T. Déchelette, J. Delabrouille, J. -M. Delouis, F. -X. Désert, C. Dickinson, J. M. Diego, H. Dole, S. Donzelli, O. Doré, M. Douspis, J. Dunkley, X. Dupac, G. Efstathiou, T. A. Enßlin, H. K. Eriksen, F. Finelli, O. Forni, M. Frailis, E. Franceschi, S. Galeotta, K. Ganga, M. Giard, G. Giardino, Y. Giraud-Héraud, J. González-Nuevo, K. M. Górski, S. Gratton, A. Gregorio, A. Gruppuso, J. E. Gudmundsson, F. K. Hansen, D. Hanson, D. Harrison, S. Henrot-Versillé, C. Hernández-Monteagudo, D. Herranz, S. R. Hildebrandt, E. Hivon, S. Ho, M. Hobson, W. A. Holmes, A. Hornstrup, W. Hovest, K. M. Huffenberger, A. H. Jaffe, T. R. Jaffe, W. C. Jones, M. Juvela, E. Keihänen, R. Keskitalo, T. S. Kisner, R. Kneissl, J. Knoche, L. Knox, M. Kunz, H. Kurki-Suonio, G. Lagache, A. Lähteenmäki, J. -M. Lamarre, A. Lasenby, R. J. Laureijs, A. Lavabre, C. R. Lawrence, J. P. Leahy, R. Leonardi, J. León-Tavares, J. Lesgourgues, A. Lewis, M. Liguori, P. B. Lilje, M. Linden-Vørnle, M. López-Caniego, P. M. Lubin, J. F. Macías-Pérez, B. Maffei, D. Maino, N. Mandolesi, A. Mangilli, M. Maris, D. J. Marshall, P. G. Martin, E. Martínez-González, S. Masi, M. Massardi, S. Matarrese, F. Matthai, P. Mazzotta, A. Melchiorri, L. Mendes, A. Mennella, M. Migliaccio, S. Mitra, M. -A. Miville-Deschênes, A. Moneti, L. Montier, G. Morgante, D. Mortlock, A. Moss, D. Munshi, J. A. Murphy, P. Naselsky, F. Nati, P. Natoli, C. B. Netterfield, H. U. Nørgaard-Nielsen, F. Noviello, D. Novikov, I. Novikov, S. Osborne, C. A. Oxborrow, F. Paci, L. Pagano, F. Pajot, D. Paoletti, B. Partridge, F. Pasian, G. Patanchon, O. Perdereau, L. Perotto, F. Perrotta, F. Piacentini, M. Piat, E. Pierpaoli, D. Pietrobon, S. Plaszczynski, E. Pointecouteau, G. Polenta, N. Ponthieu, L. Popa, T. Poutanen, G. W. Pratt, G. Prézeau, S. Prunet, J. -L. Puget, A. R. Pullen, J. P. Rachen, R. Rebolo, M. Reinecke, M. Remazeilles, C. Renault, S. Ricciardi, T. Riller, I. Ristorcelli, G. Rocha, C. Rosset, G. Roudier, and M. Rowan-Robinson (2014)
Planck 2013 results. XVII. Gravitational lensing by large-scale structure
.
A&A
571
,
pp. A17
.
External Links:
Document
,
1303.5077
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
Planck Collaboration, P. A. R. Ade, N. Aghanim, M. Arnaud, M. Ashdown, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi, A. J. Banday, R. B. Barreiro, J. G. Bartlett, N. Bartolo, S. Basak, E. Battaner, K. Benabed, A. Benoît, A. Benoit-Lévy, J. -P. Bernard, M. Bersanelli, P. Bielewicz, J. J. Bock, A. Bonaldi, L. Bonavera, J. R. Bond, J. Borrill, F. R. Bouchet, F. Boulanger, M. Bucher, C. Burigana, R. C. Butler, E. Calabrese, J. -F. Cardoso, A. Catalano, A. Challinor, A. Chamballu, H. C. Chiang, P. R. Christensen, S. Church, D. L. Clements, S. Colombi, L. P. L. Colombo, C. Combet, F. Couchot, A. Coulais, B. P. Crill, A. Curto, F. Cuttaia, L. Danese, R. D. Davies, R. J. Davis, P. de Bernardis, A. de Rosa, G. de Zotti, J. Delabrouille, F. -X. Désert, J. M. Diego, H. Dole, S. Donzelli, O. Doré, M. Douspis, A. Ducout, J. Dunkley, X. Dupac, G. Efstathiou, F. Elsner, T. A. Enßlin, H. K. Eriksen, J. Fergusson, F. Finelli, O. Forni, M. Frailis, A. A. Fraisse, E. Franceschi, A. Frejsel, S. Galeotta, S. Galli, K. Ganga, M. Giard, Y. Giraud-Héraud, E. Gjerløw, J. González-Nuevo, K. M. Górski, S. Gratton, A. Gregorio, A. Gruppuso, J. E. Gudmundsson, F. K. Hansen, D. Hanson, D. L. Harrison, S. Henrot-Versillé, C. Hernández-Monteagudo, D. Herranz, S. R. Hildebrandt, E. Hivon, M. Hobson, W. A. Holmes, A. Hornstrup, W. Hovest, K. M. Huffenberger, G. Hurier, A. H. Jaffe, T. R. Jaffe, W. C. Jones, M. Juvela, E. Keihänen, R. Keskitalo, T. S. Kisner, R. Kneissl, J. Knoche, M. Kunz, H. Kurki-Suonio, G. Lagache, A. Lähteenmäki, J. -M. Lamarre, A. Lasenby, M. Lattanzi, C. R. Lawrence, R. Leonardi, J. Lesgourgues, F. Levrier, A. Lewis, M. Liguori, P. B. Lilje, M. Linden-Vørnle, M. López-Caniego, P. M. Lubin, J. F. Macías-Pérez, G. Maggio, D. Maino, N. Mandolesi, A. Mangilli, M. Maris, P. G. Martin, E. Martínez-González, S. Masi, S. Matarrese, P. McGehee, P. R. Meinhold, A. Melchiorri, L. Mendes, A. Mennella, M. Migliaccio, S. Mitra, M. -A. Miville-Deschênes, A. Moneti, L. Montier, G. Morgante, D. Mortlock, A. Moss, D. Munshi, J. A. Murphy, P. Naselsky, F. Nati, P. Natoli, C. B. Netterfield, H. U. Nørgaard-Nielsen, F. Noviello, D. Novikov, I. Novikov, C. A. Oxborrow, F. Paci, L. Pagano, F. Pajot, D. Paoletti, F. Pasian, G. Patanchon, O. Perdereau, L. Perotto, F. Perrotta, V. Pettorino, F. Piacentini, M. Piat, E. Pierpaoli, D. Pietrobon, S. Plaszczynski, E. Pointecouteau, G. Polenta, L. Popa, G. W. Pratt, G. Prézeau, S. Prunet, J. -L. Puget, J. P. Rachen, W. T. Reach, R. Rebolo, M. Reinecke, M. Remazeilles, C. Renault, A. Renzi, I. Ristorcelli, G. Rocha, C. Rosset, M. Rossetti, G. Roudier, M. Rowan-Robinson, J. A. Rubiño-Martín, B. Rusholme, M. Sandri, D. Santos, M. Savelainen, and G. Savini (2016)
Planck 2015 results. XV. Gravitational lensing
.
A&A
594
,
pp. A15
.
External Links:
Document
,
1502.01591
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
Planck Collaboration, N. Aghanim, Y. Akrami, M. Ashdown, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi, M. Ballardini, A. J. Banday, R. B. Barreiro, N. Bartolo, S. Basak, R. Battye, K. Benabed, J. -P. Bernard, M. Bersanelli, P. Bielewicz, J. J. Bock, J. R. Bond, J. Borrill, F. R. Bouchet, F. Boulanger, M. Bucher, C. Burigana, R. C. Butler, E. Calabrese, J. -F. Cardoso, J. Carron, A. Challinor, H. C. Chiang, J. Chluba, L. P. L. Colombo, C. Combet, D. Contreras, B. P. Crill, F. Cuttaia, P. de Bernardis, G. de Zotti, J. Delabrouille, J. -M. Delouis, E. Di Valentino, J. M. Diego, O. Doré, M. Douspis, A. Ducout, X. Dupac, S. Dusini, G. Efstathiou, F. Elsner, T. A. Enßlin, H. K. Eriksen, Y. Fantaye, M. Farhang, J. Fergusson, R. Fernandez-Cobos, F. Finelli, F. Forastieri, M. Frailis, A. A. Fraisse, E. Franceschi, A. Frolov, S. Galeotta, S. Galli, K. Ganga, R. T. Génova-Santos, M. Gerbino, T. Ghosh, J. González-Nuevo, K. M. Górski, S. Gratton, A. Gruppuso, J. E. Gudmundsson, J. Hamann, W. Handley, F. K. Hansen, D. Herranz, S. R. Hildebrandt, E. Hivon, Z. Huang, A. H. Jaffe, W. C. Jones, A. Karakci, E. Keihänen, R. Keskitalo, K. Kiiveri, J. Kim, T. S. Kisner, L. Knox, N. Krachmalnicoff, M. Kunz, H. Kurki-Suonio, G. Lagache, J. -M. Lamarre, A. Lasenby, M. Lattanzi, C. R. Lawrence, M. Le Jeune, P. Lemos, J. Lesgourgues, F. Levrier, A. Lewis, M. Liguori, P. B. Lilje, M. Lilley, V. Lindholm, M. López-Caniego, P. M. Lubin, Y. -Z. Ma, J. F. Macías-Pérez, G. Maggio, D. Maino, N. Mandolesi, A. Mangilli, A. Marcos-Caballero, M. Maris, P. G. Martin, M. Martinelli, E. Martínez-González, S. Matarrese, N. Mauri, J. D. McEwen, P. R. Meinhold, A. Melchiorri, A. Mennella, M. Migliaccio, M. Millea, S. Mitra, M. -A. Miville-Deschênes, D. Molinari, L. Montier, G. Morgante, A. Moss, P. Natoli, H. U. Nørgaard-Nielsen, L. Pagano, D. Paoletti, B. Partridge, G. Patanchon, H. V. Peiris, F. Perrotta, V. Pettorino, F. Piacentini, L. Polastri, G. Polenta, J. -L. Puget, J. P. Rachen, M. Reinecke, M. Remazeilles, A. Renzi, G. Rocha, C. Rosset, G. Roudier, J. A. Rubiño-Martín, B. Ruiz-Granados, L. Salvati, M. Sandri, M. Savelainen, D. Scott, E. P. S. Shellard, C. Sirignano, G. Sirri, L. D. Spencer, R. Sunyaev, A. -S. Suur-Uski, J. A. Tauber, D. Tavagnacco, M. Tenti, L. Toffolatti, M. Tomasi, T. Trombetti, L. Valenziano, J. Valiviita, B. Van Tent, L. Vibert, P. Vielva, F. Villa, N. Vittorio, B. D. Wandelt, I. K. Wehus, M. White, S. D. M. White, A. Zacchei, and A. Zonca (2020)
Planck 2018 results. VI. Cosmological parameters
.
A&A
641
,
pp. A6
.
External Links:
Document
,
1807.06209
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
G. Pollina, M. Baldi, F. Marulli, and L. Moscardini (2016)
Cosmic voids in coupled dark energy cosmologies: the impact of halo bias
.
MNRAS
455
(
3
),
pp. 3075–3085
.
External Links:
Document
,
1506.08831
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Radinović, S. Nadathur, H. -A. Winther, W. J. Percival, A. Woodfinden, E. Massara, E. Paillas, S. Contarini, N. Hamaus, A. Kovacs, A. Pisani, G. Verza, M. Aubert, A. Amara, N. Auricchio, M. Baldi, D. Bonino, E. Branchini, M. Brescia, S. Camera, V. Capobianco, C. Carbone, V. F. Cardone, J. Carretero, M. Castellano, S. Cavuoti, A. Cimatti, R. Cledassou, G. Congedo, L. Conversi, Y. Copin, L. Corcione, F. Courbin, A. Da Silva, M. Douspis, F. Dubath, X. Dupac, S. Farrens, S. Ferriol, P. Fosalba, M. Frailis, E. Franceschi, M. Fumana, S. Galeotta, B. Garilli, W. Gillard, B. Gillis, C. Giocoli, A. Grazian, F. Grupp, S. V. H. Haugan, W. Holmes, A. Hornstrup, K. Jahnke, M. Kümmel, A. Kiessling, M. Kilbinger, T. Kitching, H. Kurki-Suonio, S. Ligori, P. B. Lilje, I. Lloro, E. Maiorano, O. Mansutti, O. Marggraf, K. Markovic, F. Marulli, R. Massey, S. Mei, M. Melchior, Y. Mellier, M. Meneghetti, E. Merlin, G. Meylan, M. Moresco, L. Moscardini, S. -M. Niemi, J. W. Nightingale, T. Nutma, C. Padilla, S. Paltani, F. Pasian, K. Pedersen, V. Pettorino, S. Pires, G. Polenta, M. Poncet, L. A. Popa, L. Pozzetti, F. Raison, A. Renzi, J. Rhodes, G. Riccio, E. Romelli, M. Roncarelli, C. Rosset, R. Saglia, D. Sapone, B. Sartoris, P. Schneider, A. Secroun, G. Seidel, S. Serrano, C. Sirignano, G. Sirri, L. Stanco, J. -L. Starck, C. Surace, P. Tallada-Crespí, I. Tereno, R. Toledo-Moreo, F. Torradeflot, I. Tutusaus, E. A. Valentijn, L. Valenziano, T. Vassallo, Y. Wang, J. Weller, G. Zamorani, J. Zoubian, and V. Scottez (2023)
Euclid: Cosmology forecasts from the void-galaxy cross-correlation function with reconstruction
.
A&A
677
,
pp. A78
.
External Links:
Document
,
2302.05302
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Raghunathan, S. Nadathur, B. D. Sherwin, and N. Whitehorn (2020a)
The Gravitational Lensing Signatures of BOSS Voids in the Cosmic Microwave Background
.
ApJ
890
(
2
),
pp. 168
.
External Links:
Document
,
1911.08475
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
4th item
.
S. Raghunathan, S. Nadathur, B. D. Sherwin, and N. Whitehorn (2020b)
The Gravitational Lensing Signatures of BOSS Voids in the Cosmic Microwave Background
.
ApJ
890
(
2
),
pp. 168
.
External Links:
Document
,
1911.08475
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§4
,
§5.2.2
,
footnote 11
.
D. S. Reed, A. Schneider, R. E. Smith, D. Potter, J. Stadel, and B. Moore (2015)
The same with less: the cosmic web of warm versus cold dark matter dwarf galaxies
.
MNRAS
451
(
4
),
pp. 4413–4423
.
External Links:
Document
,
1410.1541
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
A. Rocher, V. Ruhlmann-Kleider, E. Burtin, S. Yuan, A. de Mattia, A. J. Ross, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, D. Bianchi, D. Brooks, S. Cole, K. Dawson, A. de la Macorra, P. Doel, D. J. Eisenstein, K. Fanning, J. E. Forero-Romero, L. H. Garrison, S. Gontcho A Gontcho, V. Gonzalez-Perez, J. Guy, B. Hadzhiyska, C. Hahn, K. Honscheid, T. Kisner, M. Landriau, J. Lasker, M. E. Levi, M. Manera, A. Meisner, R. Miquel, J. Moustakas, E. Mueller, J. A. Newman, J. Nie, W. J. Percival, C. Poppett, F. Qin, G. Rossi, L. Samushia, E. Sanchez, D. Schlegel, M. Schubnell, H. Seo, G. Tarlé, M. Vargas-Magaña, B. A. Weaver, J. Yu, H. Zhang, Z. Zheng, Z. Zhou, and H. Zou (2023)
The DESI One-Percent survey: exploring the Halo Occupation Distribution of Emission Line Galaxies with ABACUSSUMMIT simulations
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2023
(
10
),
pp. 016
.
External Links:
Document
,
2306.06319
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.1
.
T. Ronconi and F. Marulli (2017)
Cosmological exploitation of cosmic void statistics. New numerical tools in the CosmoBolognaLib to extract cosmological constraints from the void size function
.
A&A
607
,
pp. A24
.
External Links:
Document
,
1703.07848
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
R. K. Sachs and A. M. Wolfe (1967)
Perturbations of a Cosmological Model and Angular Variations of the Microwave Background
.
ApJ
147
,
pp. 73
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
C. Sánchez, J. Clampitt, A. Kovacs, B. Jain, J. García-Bellido, S. Nadathur, D. Gruen, N. Hamaus, D. Huterer, P. Vielzeuf, A. Amara, C. Bonnett, J. DeRose, W. G. Hartley, M. Jarvis, O. Lahav, R. Miquel, E. Rozo, E. S. Rykoff, E. Sheldon, R. H. Wechsler, J. Zuntz, T. M. C. Abbott, F. B. Abdalla, J. Annis, A. Benoit-Lévy, G. M. Bernstein, R. A. Bernstein, E. Bertin, D. Brooks, E. Buckley-Geer, A. Carnero Rosell, M. Carrasco Kind, J. Carretero, M. Crocce, C. E. Cunha, C. B. D’Andrea, L. N. da Costa, S. Desai, H. T. Diehl, J. P. Dietrich, P. Doel, A. E. Evrard, A. Fausti Neto, B. Flaugher, P. Fosalba, J. Frieman, E. Gaztanaga, R. A. Gruendl, G. Gutierrez, K. Honscheid, D. J. James, E. Krause, K. Kuehn, M. Lima, M. A. G. Maia, J. L. Marshall, P. Melchior, A. A. Plazas, K. Reil, A. K. Romer, E. Sanchez, M. Schubnell, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, R. C. Smith, M. Soares-Santos, F. Sobreira, E. Suchyta, G. Tarle, D. Thomas, A. R. Walker, J. Weller, and DES Collaboration (2017)
Cosmic voids and void lensing in the Dark Energy Survey Science Verification data
.
MNRAS
465
(
1
),
pp. 746–759
.
External Links:
Document
,
1605.03982
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§2.1
.
S. Sartori, P. Vielzeuf, S. Escoffier, M. C. Cousinou, A. Kovács, J. DeRose, S. Ahlen, D. Bianchi, D. Brooks, E. Burtin, T. Claybaugh, A. de la Macorra, J. E. Forero-Romero, J. Garcia-Bellido, S. Gontcho A Gontcho, G. Gutierrez, K. Honscheid, R. Kehoe, D. Kirkby, T. Kisner, M. Landriau, M. E. Levi, A. Meisner, R. Miquel, J. Moustakas, J. A. Newman, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, I. Pérez-Ràfols, F. Prada, G. Rossi, E. Sanchez, D. Sprayberry, G. Tarlé, and B. A. Weaver (2025)
The imprint of cosmic voids from the DESI Legacy Survey DR9 Luminous Red Galaxies in the Planck 2018 lensing map through spectroscopically calibrated mocks
.
A&A
700
,
pp. A17
.
External Links:
Document
,
2412.02761
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§4.4
,
§4
,
§6
.
N. Schuster, N. Hamaus, A. Pisani, K. Dolag, and J. Weller (2025)
Why Cosmic Voids Matter: Pristine Evolution
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2509.07092
.
External Links:
Document
,
2509.07092
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.1.2
.
B. D. Sherwin, A. van Engelen, N. Sehgal, M. Madhavacheril, G. E. Addison, S. Aiola, R. Allison, N. Battaglia, D. T. Becker, J. A. Beall, J. R. Bond, E. Calabrese, R. Datta, M. J. Devlin, R. Dünner, J. Dunkley, A. E. Fox, P. Gallardo, M. Halpern, M. Hasselfield, S. Henderson, J. C. Hill, G. C. Hilton, J. Hubmayr, J. P. Hughes, A. D. Hincks, R. Hlozek, K. M. Huffenberger, B. Koopman, A. Kosowsky, T. Louis, L. Maurin, J. McMahon, K. Moodley, S. Naess, F. Nati, L. Newburgh, M. D. Niemack, L. A. Page, J. Sievers, D. N. Spergel, S. T. Staggs, R. J. Thornton, J. Van Lanen, E. Vavagiakis, and E. J. Wollack (2017)
Two-season Atacama Cosmology Telescope polarimeter lensing power spectrum
.
Phys. Rev. D
95
(
12
),
pp. 123529
.
External Links:
Document
,
1611.09753
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
R. K. Sheth and R. van de Weygaert (2004)
A hierarchy of voids: much ado about nothing
.
MNRAS
350
(
2
),
pp. 517–538
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0311260
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§5.1.2
.
G. F. Smoot, C. L. Bennett, A. Kogut, E. L. Wright, J. Aymon, N. W. Boggess, E. S. Cheng, G. de Amici, S. Gulkis, M. G. Hauser, G. Hinshaw, P. D. Jackson, M. Janssen, E. Kaita, T. Kelsall, P. Keegstra, C. Lineweaver, K. Loewenstein, P. Lubin, J. Mather, S. S. Meyer, S. H. Moseley, T. Murdock, L. Rokke, R. F. Silverberg, L. Tenorio, R. Weiss, and D. T. Wilkinson (1992)
Structure in the COBE Differential Microwave Radiometer First-Year Maps
.
ApJ
396
,
pp. L1
.
External Links:
Document
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
.
D. Spergel, N. Gehrels, C. Baltay, D. Bennett, J. Breckinridge, M. Donahue, A. Dressler, B. S. Gaudi, T. Greene, O. Guyon, C. Hirata, J. Kalirai, N. J. Kasdin, B. Macintosh, W. Moos, S. Perlmutter, M. Postman, B. Rauscher, J. Rhodes, Y. Wang, D. Weinberg, D. Benford, M. Hudson, W. -S. Jeong, Y. Mellier, W. Traub, T. Yamada, P. Capak, J. Colbert, D. Masters, M. Penny, D. Savransky, D. Stern, N. Zimmerman, R. Barry, L. Bartusek, K. Carpenter, E. Cheng, D. Content, F. Dekens, R. Demers, K. Grady, C. Jackson, G. Kuan, J. Kruk, M. Melton, B. Nemati, B. Parvin, I. Poberezhskiy, C. Peddie, J. Ruffa, J. K. Wallace, A. Whipple, E. Wollack, and F. Zhao (2015)
Wide-Field InfrarRed Survey Telescope-Astrophysics Focused Telescope Assets WFIRST-AFTA 2015 Report
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:1503.03757
.
External Links:
Document
,
1503.03757
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§2.1
.
D. N. Spergel, L. Verde, H. V. Peiris, E. Komatsu, M. R. Nolta, C. L. Bennett, M. Halpern, G. Hinshaw, N. Jarosik, A. Kogut, M. Limon, S. S. Meyer, L. Page, G. S. Tucker, J. L. Weiland, E. Wollack, and E. L. Wright (2003)
First-Year Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Observations: Determination of Cosmological Parameters
.
ApJS
148
(
1
),
pp. 175–194
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0302209
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
G. Stein, M. A. Alvarez, J. R. Bond, A. van Engelen, and N. Battaglia (2020)
The Websky extragalactic CMB simulations
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2020
(
10
),
pp. 012
.
External Links:
Document
,
2001.08787
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
K. T. Story, D. Hanson, P. A. R. Ade, K. A. Aird, J. E. Austermann, J. A. Beall, A. N. Bender, B. A. Benson, L. E. Bleem, J. E. Carlstrom, C. L. Chang, H. C. Chiang, H. -M. Cho, R. Citron, T. M. Crawford, A. T. Crites, T. de Haan, M. A. Dobbs, W. Everett, J. Gallicchio, J. Gao, E. M. George, A. Gilbert, N. W. Halverson, N. Harrington, J. W. Henning, G. C. Hilton, G. P. Holder, W. L. Holzapfel, S. Hoover, Z. Hou, J. D. Hrubes, N. Huang, J. Hubmayr, K. D. Irwin, R. Keisler, L. Knox, A. T. Lee, E. M. Leitch, D. Li, C. Liang, D. Luong-Van, J. J. McMahon, J. Mehl, S. S. Meyer, L. Mocanu, T. E. Montroy, T. Natoli, J. P. Nibarger, V. Novosad, S. Padin, C. Pryke, C. L. Reichardt, J. E. Ruhl, B. R. Saliwanchik, J. T. Sayre, K. K. Schaffer, G. Smecher, A. A. Stark, C. Tucker, K. Vanderlinde, J. D. Vieira, G. Wang, N. Whitehorn, V. Yefremenko, and O. Zahn (2015)
A Measurement of the Cosmic Microwave Background Gravitational Lensing Potential from 100 Square Degrees of SPTpol Data
.
ApJ
810
(
1
),
pp. 50
.
External Links:
Document
,
1412.4760
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
R. A. Sunyaev and I. B. Zeldovich (1980)
The velocity of clusters of galaxies relative to the microwave background - The possibility of its measurement
.
MNRAS
190
,
pp. 413–420
.
External Links:
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
R. A. Sunyaev and Y. B. Zeldovich (1972)
The Observations of Relic Radiation as a Test of the Nature of X-Ray Radiation from the Clusters of Galaxies
.
Comments on Astrophysics and Space Physics
4
,
pp. 173
.
External Links:
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
M. Takada, R. S. Ellis, M. Chiba, J. E. Greene, H. Aihara, N. Arimoto, K. Bundy, J. Cohen, O. Doré, G. Graves, J. E. Gunn, T. Heckman, C. M. Hirata, P. Ho, J. Kneib, O. Le Fèvre, L. Lin, S. More, H. Murayama, T. Nagao, M. Ouchi, M. Seiffert, J. D. Silverman, L. Sodré, D. N. Spergel, M. A. Strauss, H. Sugai, Y. Suto, H. Takami, and R. Wyse (2014)
Extragalactic science, cosmology, and Galactic archaeology with the Subaru Prime Focus Spectrograph
.
PASJ
66
(
1
),
pp. R1
.
External Links:
Document
,
1206.0737
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
G. Verza, C. Carbone, A. Pisani, C. Porciani, and S. Matarrese (2024a)
The universal multiplicity function: counting haloes and voids
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2024
(
10
),
pp. 079
.
External Links:
Document
,
2401.14451
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
G. Verza, G. Degni, A. Pisani, N. Hamaus, E. Massara, A. Benson, S. Escoffier, Y. Wang, Z. Zhai, and O. Doré (2024b)
Cosmology with voids from the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp. arXiv:2410.19713
.
External Links:
Document
,
2410.19713
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
G. Verza, A. Pisani, C. Carbone, N. Hamaus, and L. Guzzo (2019)
The void size function in dynamical dark energy cosmologies
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2019
(
12
),
pp. 040
.
External Links:
Document
,
1906.00409
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
P. Vielzeuf, A. Kovács, U. Demirbozan, P. Fosalba, E. Baxter, N. Hamaus, D. Huterer, R. Miquel, S. Nadathur, G. Pollina, C. Sánchez, L. Whiteway, T. M. C. Abbott, S. Allam, J. Annis, S. Avila, D. Brooks, D. L. Burke, A. Carnero Rosell, M. Carrasco Kind, J. Carretero, R. Cawthon, M. Costanzi, L. N. da Costa, J. De Vicente, S. Desai, H. T. Diehl, P. Doel, T. F. Eifler, S. Everett, B. Flaugher, J. Frieman, J. García-Bellido, E. Gaztanaga, D. W. Gerdes, D. Gruen, R. A. Gruendl, J. Gschwend, G. Gutierrez, W. G. Hartley, D. L. Hollowood, K. Honscheid, D. J. James, K. Kuehn, N. Kuropatkin, O. Lahav, M. Lima, M. A. G. Maia, M. March, J. L. Marshall, P. Melchior, F. Menanteau, A. Palmese, F. Paz-Chinchón, A. A. Plazas, E. Sanchez, V. Scarpine, S. Serrano, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, M. Smith, E. Suchyta, G. Tarle, D. Thomas, J. Weller, J. Zuntz, J. Zuntz, and DES Collaboration (2021a)
Dark Energy Survey Year 1 results: the lensing imprint of cosmic voids on the cosmic microwave background
.
MNRAS
500
(
1
),
pp. 464–480
.
External Links:
Document
,
1911.02951
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§5.1.3
,
§5.1.5
,
§6
.
P. Vielzeuf, A. Kovács, U. Demirbozan, P. Fosalba, E. Baxter, N. Hamaus, D. Huterer, R. Miquel, S. Nadathur, G. Pollina, C. Sánchez, L. Whiteway, T. M. C. Abbott, S. Allam, J. Annis, S. Avila, D. Brooks, D. L. Burke, A. Carnero Rosell, M. Carrasco Kind, J. Carretero, R. Cawthon, M. Costanzi, L. N. da Costa, J. De Vicente, S. Desai, H. T. Diehl, P. Doel, T. F. Eifler, S. Everett, B. Flaugher, J. Frieman, J. García-Bellido, E. Gaztanaga, D. W. Gerdes, D. Gruen, R. A. Gruendl, J. Gschwend, G. Gutierrez, W. G. Hartley, D. L. Hollowood, K. Honscheid, D. J. James, K. Kuehn, N. Kuropatkin, O. Lahav, M. Lima, M. A. G. Maia, M. March, J. L. Marshall, P. Melchior, F. Menanteau, A. Palmese, F. Paz-Chinchón, A. A. Plazas, E. Sanchez, V. Scarpine, S. Serrano, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, M. Smith, E. Suchyta, G. Tarle, D. Thomas, J. Weller, J. Zuntz, J. Zuntz, and DES Collaboration (2021b)
Dark Energy Survey Year 1 results: the lensing imprint of cosmic voids on the cosmic microwave background
.
MNRAS
500
(
1
),
pp. 464–480
.
External Links:
Document
,
1911.02951
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
.
P. Vielzeuf, M. Calabrese, C. Carbone, G. Fabbian, and C. Baccigalupi (2023a)
DEMNUni: the imprint of massive neutrinos on the cross-correlation between cosmic voids and CMB lensing
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2023
(
8
),
pp. 010
.
External Links:
Document
,
2303.10048
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§6
.
P. Vielzeuf, M. Calabrese, C. Carbone, G. Fabbian, and C. Baccigalupi (2023b)
DEMNUni: the imprint of massive neutrinos on the cross-correlation between cosmic voids and CMB lensing
.
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.
2023
(
8
),
pp. 010
.
External Links:
Document
,
2303.10048
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
L. Wenzl, C. Doux, C. Heinrich, R. Bean, B. Jain, O. Doré, T. Eifler, and X. Fang (2022)
Cosmology with the Roman Space Telescope - Synergies with CMB lensing
.
MNRAS
512
(
4
),
pp. 5311–5328
.
External Links:
Document
,
2112.07681
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§6
.
W. L. K. Wu, L. M. Mocanu, P. A. R. Ade, A. J. Anderson, J. E. Austermann, J. S. Avva, J. A. Beall, A. N. Bender, B. A. Benson, F. Bianchini, L. E. Bleem, J. E. Carlstrom, C. L. Chang, H. C. Chiang, R. Citron, C. Corbett Moran, T. M. Crawford, A. T. Crites, T. de Haan, M. A. Dobbs, W. Everett, J. Gallicchio, E. M. George, A. Gilbert, N. Gupta, N. W. Halverson, N. Harrington, J. W. Henning, G. C. Hilton, G. P. Holder, W. L. Holzapfel, Z. Hou, J. D. Hrubes, N. Huang, J. Hubmayr, K. D. Irwin, L. Knox, A. T. Lee, D. Li, A. Lowitz, A. Manzotti, J. J. McMahon, S. S. Meyer, M. Millea, J. Montgomery, A. Nadolski, T. Natoli, J. P. Nibarger, G. I. Noble, V. Novosad, Y. Omori, S. Padin, S. Patil, C. Pryke, C. L. Reichardt, J. E. Ruhl, B. R. Saliwanchik, J. T. Sayre, K. K. Schaffer, C. Sievers, G. Simard, G. Smecher, A. A. Stark, K. T. Story, C. Tucker, K. Vanderlinde, T. Veach, J. D. Vieira, G. Wang, N. Whitehorn, and V. Yefremenko (2019)
A Measurement of the Cosmic Microwave Background Lensing Potential and Power Spectrum from 500 deg
2
of SPTpol Temperature and Polarization Data
.
ApJ
884
(
1
),
pp. 70
.
External Links:
Document
,
1905.05777
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
D. G. York, J. Adelman, J. E. Anderson, S. F. Anderson, J. Annis, N. A. Bahcall, J. A. Bakken, R. Barkhouser, S. Bastian, E. Berman, W. N. Boroski, S. Bracker, C. Briegel, J. W. Briggs, J. Brinkmann, R. Brunner, S. Burles, L. Carey, M. A. Carr, F. J. Castander, B. Chen, P. L. Colestock, A. J. Connolly, J. H. Crocker, I. Csabai, P. C. Czarapata, J. E. Davis, M. Doi, T. Dombeck, D. Eisenstein, N. Ellman, B. R. Elms, M. L. Evans, X. Fan, G. R. Federwitz, L. Fiscelli, S. Friedman, J. A. Frieman, M. Fukugita, B. Gillespie, J. E. Gunn, V. K. Gurbani, E. de Haas, M. Haldeman, F. H. Harris, J. Hayes, T. M. Heckman, G. S. Hennessy, R. B. Hindsley, S. Holm, D. J. Holmgren, C. Huang, C. Hull, D. Husby, S. Ichikawa, T. Ichikawa, Ž. Ivezić, S. Kent, R. S. J. Kim, E. Kinney, M. Klaene, A. N. Kleinman, S. Kleinman, G. R. Knapp, J. Korienek, R. G. Kron, P. Z. Kunszt, D. Q. Lamb, B. Lee, R. F. Leger, S. Limmongkol, C. Lindenmeyer, D. C. Long, C. Loomis, J. Loveday, R. Lucinio, R. H. Lupton, B. MacKinnon, E. J. Mannery, P. M. Mantsch, B. Margon, P. McGehee, T. A. McKay, A. Meiksin, A. Merelli, D. G. Monet, J. A. Munn, V. K. Narayanan, T. Nash, E. Neilsen, R. Neswold, H. J. Newberg, R. C. Nichol, T. Nicinski, M. Nonino, N. Okada, S. Okamura, J. P. Ostriker, R. Owen, A. G. Pauls, J. Peoples, R. L. Peterson, D. Petravick, J. R. Pier, A. Pope, R. Pordes, A. Prosapio, R. Rechenmacher, T. R. Quinn, G. T. Richards, M. W. Richmond, C. H. Rivetta, C. M. Rockosi, K. Ruthmansdorfer, D. Sandford, D. J. Schlegel, D. P. Schneider, M. Sekiguchi, G. Sergey, K. Shimasaku, W. A. Siegmund, S. Smee, J. A. Smith, S. Snedden, R. Stone, C. Stoughton, M. A. Strauss, C. Stubbs, M. SubbaRao, A. S. Szalay, I. Szapudi, G. P. Szokoly, A. R. Thakar, C. Tremonti, D. L. Tucker, A. Uomoto, D. Vanden Berk, M. S. Vogeley, P. Waddell, Shu-i. Wang, M. Watanabe, D. H. Weinberg, B. Yanny, N. Yasuda, and SDSS Collaboration (2000)
The Sloan Digital Sky Survey: Technical Summary
.
AJ
120
(
3
),
pp. 1579–1587
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0006396
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§1
.
J. Yu, C. Zhao, V. Gonzalez-Perez, C. Chuang, A. Brodzeller, A. de Mattia, J. Kneib, A. Krolewski, A. Rocher, A. Ross, Y. Wang, S. Yuan, H. Zhang, R. Zhou, J. N. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, D. Brooks, K. Dawson, A. de la Macorra, P. Doel, K. Fanning, A. Font-Ribera, J. Forero-Romero, S. G. A. Gontcho, K. Honscheid, R. Kehoe, T. Kisner, A. Kremin, M. Landriau, M. Manera, P. Martini, A. Meisner, R. Miquel, J. Moustakas, J. Nie, W. Percival, C. Poppett, A. Raichoor, G. Rossi, H. Seo, G. Tarlé, Z. Zhou, and H. Zou (2024)
The DESI One-Percent Survey: exploring a generalized SHAM for multiple tracers with the UNIT simulation
.
MNRAS
527
(
3
),
pp. 6950–6969
.
External Links:
Document
,
2306.06313
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.1
.
S. Yuan, R. H. Wechsler, Y. Wang, M. A. C. de los Reyes, J. Myles, A. Rocher, B. Hadzhiyska, J. N. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, D. Brooks, T. Claybaugh, S. Cole, A. de la Macorra, J. E. Forero-Romero, S. G. A. Gontcho, J. Guy, K. Honscheid, T. Kisner, M. Levi, M. Manera, A. Meisner, R. Miquel, J. Moustakas, J. Nie, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, C. Poppett, M. Rezaie, A. J. Ross, G. Rossi, E. Sanchez, M. Schubnell, H. Seo, G. Tarlé, B. A. Weaver, and Z. Zhou (2025)
Unraveling emission line galaxy conformity at z
~
1 with DESI early data
.
MNRAS
538
(
2
),
pp. 1216–1240
.
External Links:
Document
,
2310.09329
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
§3.1
.
Z. Zhai, C. Chuang, Y. Wang, A. Benson, and G. Yepes (2021)
Clustering in the simulated H
α
\alpha
galaxy redshift survey from Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope
.
MNRAS
501
(
3
),
pp. 3490–3501
.
External Links:
Document
,
2008.09746
,
ADS entry
Cited by:
Appendix A
,
Appendix B
,
§2.1
,
§5.1
.
Appendix A
Comparison of void catalogs
We summarize the main properties of the void catalogs introduced in
Pérez Sar
et al.
(
2025
)
through their minimum density and effective radius. Figure
9
shows contour distributions for each mock family (columns) and tracer selection (colors), highlighting the level of agreement of the catalogs in comparison with the reference
Roman
mock from
Zhai
et al.
(
2021
)
, depicted with grey-shaded contours.
Figure 9
:
Distribution of void minimum density and radius for the different catalogs. Columns correspond to mock families, while colors show different tracer selections.
Figure 10
:
Void
×
\times
CMB
κ
\kappa
signal under different instrumental noise levels (
Planck
, SO, CMB-S4-like). Top: stacked profiles. Bottom: residuals and corresponding tension.
Appendix B
Void
×
\times
CMB
κ
\kappa
with instrumental noise
Figure
10
shows the Void
×
\times
CMB
κ
\kappa
signal for the whole void sample including instrumental noise. We consider the three void definitions (3D voids, and 2D voids with
sm
VF
=
10
{\rm sm_{VF}}=10
and
5
​
h
−
1
​
Mpc
5\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}\penalty 10000\ {\rm Mpc}
) and a set of mock catalogs that cover both well-matched and discrepant cases, based on their ability to reproduce the void and galaxy one- and two-point statistics of the reference
Roman
mock from
Zhai
et al.
(
2021
)
(more details in
Pérez Sar
et al.
2025
). Deviations at the
∼
2
​
σ
\sim 2\sigma
level appear only for S4-like noise, and marginally for SO in the 2D catalog with
sm
VF
=
5
​
h
−
1
​
Mpc
{\rm sm_{VF}}=5\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}\penalty 10000\ {\rm Mpc}
. These are driven by mocks that fail to reproduce the reference statistics (e.g.,
N
N
(M-all) and
N
​
M
​
b
env
N\,M\,b_{\rm env}
(R-ELGs)) and would therefore be excluded from a Void
×
\times
CMB
κ
\kappa
analysis. Once these statistics are matched, differences between catalogs remain below
1
​
σ
1\sigma
and are unlikely to generate any significant tension with
Λ
\Lambda
CDM.
Appendix C
Void
×
\times
CMB
κ
\kappa
with several radius cuts
We explore the impact of void size cuts in the signal by splitting the sample above and below twice the mean particle separation (mps) for both rescaled and non rescaled profiles (see
Figures
11
,
12
and
13
).
Voids smaller than 2 mps show larger scatter for two independent reasons. First, they contain fewer tracers, which increases the shot noise and the fraction of spurious detections in the void identification. Second, their small angular extent provides fewer pixels to average per radial bin, increasing the statistical uncertainty in the stacked profiles. Despite their intrinsic scatter, small voids do not appear to drive the catalog-to-catalog variations since differences are also present in the inner bins of larger voids. The discrepancies therefore appear to be driven more generally by differences in the tracer bias among the mocks.
Figure 11
:
Rescaled (top) and non-rescaled (bottom) lensing profiles for 3D voids under radius cuts above/below twice the mean particle separation (mps). The residuals indicate the difference of each profile to the mean profile resulting from the cases that matched the one-point and two-point statistics of the reference catalog.
Figure 12
:
Same as Figure
11
for 2D voids (
sm
VF
=
10
​
h
−
1
​
Mpc
\rm sm_{VF}=10\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}\penalty 10000\ \mathrm{Mpc}
).
Figure 13
:
Same as Figure
11
for 2D voids (
sm
VF
=
5
​
h
−
1
​
Mpc
\rm sm_{VF}=5\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}\penalty 10000\ \mathrm{Mpc}
).
Figure 14
:
Same as Figure
2
but non-rescaled.
.
Appendix D
Void
×
\times
CMB
κ
\kappa
signal for the non-rescaled methodology
We show the equivalent study performed in Sect.
5.1
for the non-rescaled methodology, where void profiles are measured as a function of angular separation from the void center rather than scaled by radius. From
Figures
14
,
15
and
16
we show the Void
×
\times
CMB
κ
\kappa
signal when considering the whole void sample (covering 3D voids and 2D voids identified with
sm
VF
=
10
​
h
−
1
{\rm sm_{VF}}=10\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}
Mpc and
sm
VF
=
5
​
h
−
1
{\rm sm_{VF}}=5\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}
Mpc); the same but dividing by void type; and the signal-to-noise ratios of the profiles for the different mock families and tracer selections.
•
If we compare Fig.
14
with Fig.
2
, 3D voids tend to exhibit higher average noise than non-rescaled ones. One might think that this is likely to result from the mixing of CMB noise across scales. However, in the non-rescaled case, profiles at larger radii (above 2–3
∘
) average over relatively large scales that are common for all cases, washing out differences between mock catalogs and making the profiles appear artificially similar. When restricted to 3
∘
, the noise levels of the two methods are broadly comparable.
Figure 15
:
Same as Figure
5
but non-rescaled.
Figure 16
:
Same as Figure
4
but non-rescaled.
•
The signal-to-noise trends across the different mock families and tracer selections remain consistent with the rescaled analysis and are reported in Figure
15
.
•
If we separate by void type in
16
the main difference with respect the rescaled analysis is that for 2D voids the distinction of void populations is clearer. This impacts the values of the
κ
max
,
wall
\kappa_{\rm max,wall}
(which was almost constant and without a definite trend in the rescaled case) and
κ
Δ
\kappa_{\rm\Delta}
, which now show an evolution. As the void population shifts towards larger and more under compensated voids (voids-in-voids), the compensation wall amplitude and the net convergence become progressively more negative.
Appendix E
Forecast table
Table
3
summarizes the signal-to-noise ratios of
Roman
Void × CMB
κ
\kappa
measurements across different noise configurations (
Planck
, SO, and CMB-S4–like surveys), void definitions (2D and 3D), stacking methods (rescaled and non-rescaled profiles), and CMB map smoothing scales.
When considering all voids, the non-rescaled approach generally produces a lower S/N compared to the rescaled method, which is consistent with our previous findings: stacking non-rescaled voids mixes very different void profiles, diluting the overall signal. On average, the rescaled method achieves a 21
%
\%
higher S/N for 3D voids (except for 3D voids in
Planck
, where non-rescaled is 33
%
\%
higher
12
12
12
This is likely because rescaling upweights the high-multipole (small-scale) noise associated with the smaller, more numerous voids and 3D voids, due to their lower abundance and weaker signal, are more sensitivity to this effect.
), 16
%
\%
higher for 2D voids with
sm
VF
=
5
​
h
−
1
{\rm sm_{VF}}=5\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}\penalty 10000\
Mpc, and 12
%
\%
higher for 2D voids with
sm
VF
=
10
​
h
−
1
{\rm sm_{VF}}=10\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}\penalty 10000\
Mpc. When binning by void type, the differences in S/N between rescaled and non-rescaled methods are much smaller and more variable: for 3D voids, S/N ranges roughly from –9 to 5
%
\%
, while for 2D voids it spans approximately –2 to 11
%
\%
, depending on void size and smoothing scale.
When voids are separated by type, the rescaled method yields a slightly lower total S/N than stacking the full sample, except for the most extreme 3D bins. For these bins,
Planck
shows gains of 49
%
\%
(
λ
v
<
−
1
\lambda_{v}<-1
) and 27
%
\%
(
λ
v
>
7
\lambda_{v}>7
), and SO gains 23
%
\%
(
λ
v
<
−
1
\lambda_{v}<-1
) and 4
%
\%
(
λ
v
>
7
\lambda_{v}>7
) relative to the full void sample. In the non-rescaled method, 3D voids consistently gain S/N across all noise levels when dividing by void type: for
λ
v
<
−
1
\lambda_{v}<-1
, the improvement is 12, 20, 48, and 2
%
\%
for the noise-free, CMB-S4-like, SO, and
Planck
, respectively, and for
λ
v
>
7
\lambda_{v}>7
, it is 4, 12, 43, and 13
%
\%
. The trend shows that there is an improvement of the S/N as the noise level increases, except for
Planck
. We attribute this behaviour to the trade-off between reducing the intrinsic profile variance—by grouping similar void profiles—and the loss of statistical power from having fewer objects per bin. For S4-like and SO, grouping by void type outweighs the loss in statistics but for
Planck
, the gain is negligible in comparison with the loss in statistical power, resulting in a reduction of the S/N.
Dividing by type for the 2D voids shows no S/N improvement in either method compared to the full void sample. As we have already noted, in the non-rescaled approach, the reason could be the chosen void type binning. 2D bins were defined to have equal numbers of voids, which resulted in a wide range of radii (for example, the largest bin ranges from 32 to 283
h
−
1
h^{-1}\penalty 10000\
Mpc). This broad range mixes very different profiles, which lowers the S/N for the non-rescaled method. The binning strategy works well for the rescaled method where stacking voids of different sizes does not significantly degrade the signal, but it is not optimal for a non-rescaled analysis.
Noise configurations
Noise-free
S4-like
SO
Planck
S/N
sm
map
[°]
Δ
​
(
S
/
N
)
0
\Delta(\rm S/N)_{0}
[%]
S/N
sm
map
[°]
Δ
​
(
S
/
N
)
0
\Delta(\rm S/N)_{0}
[%]
S/N
sm
map
[°]
Δ
​
(
S
/
N
)
0
\Delta(\rm S/N)_{0}
[%]
S/N
sm
map
[°]
Δ
​
(
S
/
N
)
0
\Delta(\rm S/N)_{0}
[%]
Void type
3D Voids
R
all
20.58
0.2
4.19
18.43
0.5
13.15
12.95
0.5
26.24
7.75
1
26.97
bin1
19.05
0.5
8.76
18.14
0.5
9.65
15.96
0.8
17.16
11.58
1.2
25.51
bin2
12.73
0.2
0.42
10.76
0.2
7.06
7.62
0.2
14.38
6.33
0.2
15.89
bin3
16.7
0.2
4.45
15.75
0.2
5.03
13.44
0.5
2.93
9.81
0.2
2.34
NR
all
16.58
0.2
2.99
14.66
0.2
7.87
10.12
0.5
11.73
10.33
1.2
57.86
bin1
18.58
0.2
2.38
17.64
0.2
1.93
14.96
0.2
1.74
10.54
0.2
2.53
bin2
11.69
0
0.0
10.34
0.2
2.43
8.05
0.2
1.11
7.51
0
0.0
bin3
17.24
0.2
1.84
16.47
0.2
3.25
14.48
0.5
3.29
11.7
1.2
14.54
2D Voids
(sm
VF
= 10
h
−
1
h^{-1}
Mpc)
R
all
25.01
0.2
2.12
23.39
0.2
3.77
19.22
0.5
14.4
12.23
0.8
38.78
bin1
16.78
0.2
1.06
15.52
0.2
1.48
11.5
0.2
5.25
7.86
0.8
31.73
bin2
15.87
0
0.0
14.63
0.2
1.12
11.99
0.5
2.95
8.51
0.5
5.67
bin3
18.2
0.2
1.51
17.66
0.2
3.24
15.5
0.5
9.24
11.01
0.5
14.81
NR
all
22.17
0
0.0
21.03
0.2
0.32
16.67
0.2
0.88
10.54
0.2
1.03
bin1
16.35
0
0.0
15.37
0
0.0
11.6
0
0.0
7.41
0
0.0
bin2
15.82
0.2
0.16
14.54
0.2
1.21
11.43
0.2
0.67
7.67
0
0.0
bin3
16.0
0.2
0.26
15.7
0.2
1.59
13.83
0.5
3.19
10.18
0.5
4.73
2D Voids
(sm
VF
= 5
h
−
1
h^{-1}
Mpc)
R
all
34.38
0
0.0
30.52
0.2
3.14
21.63
0.5
7.56
12.59
0.8
26.24
bin1
24.31
0
0.0
21.33
0.2
1.9
13.51
0.5
4.48
7.22
0
0.0
bin2
20.75
0.2
1.06
18.92
0.2
0.45
13.88
0.5
1.43
8.44
0.5
4.71
bin3
23.46
0.2
1.37
22.22
0.2
4.24
17.32
0.2
4.89
11.49
0.8
8.4
NR
all
28.33
0.2
0.67
25.72
0.2
2.91
18.05
0.2
4.74
10.75
1
17.47
bin1
23.24
0.2
1.51
21.06
0.2
3.56
13.69
0.2
5.82
8.12
0.5
16.86
bin2
20.12
0.2
0.49
18.42
0.2
1.88
13.19
0.2
3.88
8.12
1.2
21.53
bin3
20.41
0.2
2.61
19.13
0.2
3.83
15.18
0.2
2.93
10.94
1.2
7.11
Table 3
:
Signal-to-noise ratios for 3D and 2D voids under different rescaling assumptions (R = Rescaled, NR = Not rescaled) and experimental noise configurations. Smoothing scales are given in degrees. The column
Δ
​
(
S
/
N
)
0
\Delta(S/N)_{0}
shows the relative change of S/N compared to the baseline value at zero smoothing. The different bins correspond to
λ
\lambda
∈
\in
[-70,70] (all), [-70,-1], [1,7], and [7,70] for 3D voids,
R
v
R_{\rm v}
∈
\in
[11,283] (all), [11,28], [28,49], and [49,283]
h
−
1
h^{-1}
Mpc for 2D voids with
sm
VF
=
10
​
h
−
1
{\rm sm_{VF}}=10\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}
Mpc, and
R
v
R_{\rm v}
∈
\in
[5,283] (all), [5,16], [16,32], and [32,283]
h
−
1
h^{-1}
Mpc for 2D voids with
sm
VF
=
5
​
h
−
1
{\rm sm_{VF}}=5\penalty 10000\ h^{-1}
Mpc.
Figure 17
:
Void
×
\times
CMB lensing profiles and profile parameters (
κ
0
​
R
v
\rm\kappa_{0R_{\rm v}}
,
κ
max
,
wall
\rm\kappa_{max,wall}
,
κ
Δ
\rm\kappa_{\Delta}
) for
Agora
with original vs. sign-flipped velocities. Residuals are relative to the mean
Roman
-consistent profiles. In this plot we are just considering a noise-free CMB
κ
\kappa
map.
Appendix F
AGORA peculiar velocities
In the first of these series of papers,
(Pérez Sar
et al.
,
2025
)
, we reported that the line-of-sight velocities in the
Agora
simulation suffered from a sign inversion. When applying the
analog matching
method to the affected halo catalogs, the results still reproduce the galaxy power spectrum of the reference
Roman
mock, but they deliver unphysical void statistics (see Figure D.1 in the Appendix of
Pérez Sar
et al.
2025
), which highlight the importance of using void statistics as a diagnostic for simulation consistency.
Here we test how this inversion impacts the lensing signal. The flipped-velocity catalogs create an artificially deep convergence profile, deviating by up to
3
​
σ
3\sigma
from the expected amplitude. The trend follows void type: voids-in-voids show a stronger, spurious signal, while voids-in-clouds appear shallower.
We stress that while Void
×
\times
CMB lensing is robust against moderate variations in galaxy bias, it is sensitive to the selection effects that define the void sample. As illustrated in this example, a mock can successfully reproduce the clustering statistics while delivering unphysical void properties and lensing profiles. In some forward-modelling approaches, such as Halo Occupation Distribution models that force-match observed clustering, the tracer population may become partially decoupled from the underlying matter distribution. By absorbing physical effects into the tracer bias to reproduce the observations, these approaches can produce void catalogs that fail to capture the true depth of matter underdensities, ultimately leading to biased lensing amplitudes and obscured cosmological signatures. Thus, we consider that to ensure robust cosmological constraints, void statistics must be used as a diagnostic tool to verify that the mock captures both the true depth of the matter underdensities and the spatial distribution of the tracers.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA