The Northern Cross Fast Radio Burst project: VI. The INCART public database
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
2
Observations and data processing
3
The
INCART
database
3.1
FRB analysis steps
3.2
Procedures and equations
3.3
Caveats and improvements
4
Discussion
5
Summary and conclusions
References
Acknowledgements
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2605.30192v1 [astro-ph.HE] 28 May 2026
\lefttitle
Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia
\righttitle
L. Bruno et al.
\jnlPage
14
\jnlDoiYr
2021
\doival
10.1017/pasa.xxxx.xx
\articletitt
Research Paper
\corresp
L. Bruno, Email: l.bruno@ira.inaf.it
\citeauth
L. Bruno, G. Bernardi, M. Pilia, D. Pelliciari, A. Geminardi, F. Fiori, V. Galluzzi, G. Naldi, M. Trudu, A. Zanichelli (2026), The Northern Cross Fast Radio Burst project: VI. The INCART
public database.
Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia
00
, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1017/pasa.xxxx.xx
\history
(Received xx xx xxxx; revised xx xx xxxx; accepted xx xx xxxx)
The Northern Cross Fast Radio Burst project: VI. The
INCART
public database
\sn
L.
\gn
Bruno
1
\sn
G.
\gn
Bernardi
1,2,3
\sn
M.
\gn
Pilia
4
\sn
D.
\gn
Pelliciari
1
\sn
A.
\gn
Geminardi
5,6,4
\sn
F.
\gn
Fiori
1
\sn
V.
\gn
Galluzzi
1,7
\sn
G.
\gn
Naldi
1
\sn
M.
\gn
Trudu
4
\sn
A.
\gn
Zanichelli
1
1
Istituto Nazionale di Astrofisica (INAF) - Istituto di Radioastronomia (IRA), via Gobetti 101, 40129 Bologna, Italy.
2
South African Radio Astronomy Observatory, Black River Park, 2 Fir Street, Observatory, Cape Town, 7925, South Africa.
3
Department of Physics and Electronics, Rhodes University, PO Box 94, Makhanda, 6140, South Africa.
4
Istituto Nazionale di Astrofisica (INAF) - Osservatorio Astronomico di Cagliari (OAC), via della Scienza 5, I-09047, Selargius (CA), Italy.
5
Scuola Universitaria Superiore IUSS Pavia, Palazzo del Broletto, piazza della Vittoria 15, I-27100 Pavia, Italy.
6
Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Trento, via Sommarive 14, I-38123 Povo (TN), Italy.
7
Istituto Nazionale di Astrofisica (INAF) - Italian Centre for Astronomical Archives (IA2), via G.B. Tiepolo, 11, I-34143 Trieste, Italy.
Abstract
Fast radio bursts (FRBs) are bright (Jansky-level) and short-duration (
∼
1
\sim 1
ms) flashes of extragalactic origin.
Observations of single events have now been complemented by large-area surveys, delivering FRB catalogues and enabling the first population studies. The Northern Cross (NC) radio interferometer
is one of the instruments performing observations of FRBs. In this work, we present the Italian Northern Cross Atlas of Radio Transients (
INCART
), a public platform for the distribution of data products from the NC.
INCART
makes available to the community the FRBs observed by the NC through manageable frequency-time series datasets and catalogues with best-fit physical parameters. The design of
INCART
guarantees the possibility of scientific re-analysis of the FRB properties, in view also of future releases of the processing pipeline. Furthermore,
INCART
focuses on long-term storage optimisation, which is a key aspect of state-of-the-art instrumentation. Public access to the FRB data from the NC maximises the legacy value of the collection, facilitates the synergy with other publicly-available catalogues, and fosters research group collaborations.
keywords:
astronomical data bases: miscellaneous – methods: data analyses
1
Introduction
Fast radio bursts (FRBs) are bright (Jansky-level) flashes of short duration (
∼
1
\sim 1
ms). They were first discovered in 2007
(Lorimer et al.,
2007
)
and nowadays thousands of FRB events have been reported
(Chime/Frb Collaboration et al.,
2026
)
. As a consequence of the propagation of the signal through an ionised medium, radio waves undergo dispersion, causing a delay of the arrival time at lower frequencies. This delay depends on the electron density along the path between the source and the observer, and is parametrised by the dispersion measure
DM
∝
∫
n
e
​
𝑑
l
{\rm DM}\propto\int n_{\rm e}dl
. FRBs exhibit high DM values, which are incompatible with the dispersion caused solely by the Milky Way medium, and localisation studies have indeed confirmed that their origin is extragalactic (e.g.
Tendulkar et al.
2017
; Bannister et al.
2019
). However, the progenitor and emission mechanisms producing FRBs are still unclear (e.g.
Cordes & Chatterjee
2019
; Petroff et al.
2019
; Bailes
2022
; Zhang
2023
, for reviews). It is well established that a fraction of FRBs show repeating burst activity
(e.g. Spitler et al.,
2016
; CHIME/FRB Collaboration et al.,
2019
; Chime/Frb Collaboration et al.,
2026
)
, but it is unclear whether all FRBs do repeat and if repeating and non-repeating FRBs arise from the same processes
(e.g. Chime/Frb Collaboration et al.,
2023
; Kirsten et al.,
2024
)
. Owing to their extragalactic origin and diverse intervening environments they propagate through, FRBs are useful cosmological probes
(e.g. Macquart et al.,
2020
; Bhandari & Flynn,
2021
; Wu et al.,
2022
; James et al.,
2022
; Zhang et al.,
2023
; Zhao et al.,
2023
)
. Therefore, delivering catalogues of FRBs is fundamental to investigate their origin, plan follow-up observing campaigns, and constrain cosmological parameters.
The Northern Cross (NC;
Bianchi et al.
2023
) is a T-shaped transit interferometer consisting of two perpendicular arms oriented to N-S and E-W, built in the 1960s in Medicina (
∼
30
\sim 30
km to Bologna, Italy). In the past, it was used to scan the sky at 408 MHz and delivered catalogues of extragalactic radio sources
(e.g. Colla et al.,
1970
; Fanti et al.,
1974
; Pedani & Grueff,
1999
)
. In the recent years, the NC has undergone a major upgrade that enabled the detection of FRBs (see
Locatelli et al.
2020
and references therein). With this upgrade, the NC is becoming a leading facility in Europe for the observation of FRBs. Since the first FRB detection with the NC in 2021
(Trudu et al.,
2022
)
, a total of 31 events from 6 different FRBs have been detected as of the end of 2025 (
Trudu et al.
2022
; Pelliciari et al.
2023
,
2024
; Geminardi et al. in prep.), demonstrating the capability of the instrument. With the completion of the NC refurbishment, the
Next Generation Croce del Nord
(NG-Croce) will have improved capabilities, with higher sensitivity, possibility of performing multi-beam observations, and a transient buffer for real-time detection
(Naldi et al.,
2025
)
.
The synergy between the NC and other national and international FRB detectors is becoming relevant for follow-up monitoring, localisation, spectral studies, and statistical analyses (e.g.
Pilia et al.
2020
; Casentini et al.
2025
; Shah et al.
2025
). In this paper, we present the Italian Northern Cross Atlas for Radio Transients (
INCART
1
1
1
https://ngc-frb-incart.ira.inaf.it/
), a public database that provides the scientific community with access to the Northern Cross – fast radio burst (NC–FRB) data products.
The paper is organised as follows. In Section
2
, we summarise typical observation setup, data processing, and analysis for NC–FRB data. In Section
3
, we present
INCART
and describe the procedures leading to the archived data products. In Section
4
, we discuss the key issue of large data volumes, and how this is handled by the NC and other FRB detectors. In Section
5
we summarise our work and the prospects for the NG-Croce.
2
Observations and data processing
Table 1:
Properties of current NC filterbank-format data.
Parameter
Value
Units
Description
ν
min
\nu_{\rm min}
401.039
MHz
Last frequency channel
ν
max
\nu_{\rm max}
415.854
MHz
First frequency channel
ν
c
\nu_{\rm c}
408.447
MHz
Central frequency channel
Δ
​
ν
chan
\Delta\nu_{\rm chan}
14.468
kHz
Channel width
N
chan
N_{\rm chan}
1024
Number of channels
BW
14.8
MHz
Total bandwidth
N
pol
N_{\rm pol}
1
Number of polarisations
τ
samp
\tau_{\rm samp}
138.24
μ
​
s
\mu{\rm s}
Temporal resolution
The NC operates in P-band, with a central frequency of 408 MHz and an effective bandwidth of
∼
15
\sim 15
MHz. In the current configuration, only the N-S arm is working, whereas the E-W arm is under refurbishment. The N-S arm includes 64 reflective parabolic cylinders
2
2
2
Observations carried out before 21-Mar.-2021 employed only 6 out of 64 total cylinders. Afterwards, 8 cylinders were used during 2021-2022. Starting from 2023, 16 cylinders have been used, while the remaining cylinders are currently under refurbishment.
, each one focusing the incoming radiation towards groups of dipoles along the focal line. As detailed in
Locatelli et al. (
2020
)
, the acquired signal is digitised and processed. The processing chain includes correction for cable mismatch, data channelisation, correction for delays, and combination of the response of the dipoles into a single beam. The resulting beam-formed data are converted into total intensity data stored in a custom time-frequency format, which have a typical size of
∼
250
\sim 250
GB as obtained from an observing run of 1 hour with the present NC working configuration. Finally, these data are equalised and rescaled using
digifil
from the
DSPSR
library
(van Straten & Bailes,
2011
)
, converting them into a standard
SigProc
(Lorimer,
2011
)
filterbank format suitable for transient search analysis. Currently, the NC–FRB filterbank-format data are saved with 1024 frequency channels of width 14.468 kHz each and a temporal resolution of
138.24
​
μ
​
s
138.24\;\mu{\rm s}
(see Table
1
). With this procedure, the data size is reduced to
∼
50
\sim 50
GB.
The antenna gain calibration is performed by deriving corrections from the observation of a bright calibrator at transit, with Cassiopeia A (Cas A) routinely used for the NC. Although the Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) level is typically low, various tools can be used to excise the bulk of RFI, such as
RFIFIND
(Ransom et al.,
2002
)
and
IQRM
(Morello et al.,
2022
)
. De-dispersion trials are performed over wide DM ranges to search for possible transients through
HEIMDALL
(Barsdell et al.,
2012
)
. This provides estimates of the arrival time, duration (as boxcar width), signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and DM of the candidates. The candidate events are validated by
FETCH
(Agarwal et al.,
2020
)
, which employs convolutional neural networks trained to distinguish spurious from genuine signals.
3
The
INCART
database
Figure 1:
Flowchart of data analysis steps performed by the NC
archivist
pipeline (Section
3.1
).
Figure 2:
Example of diagnostic plots for FRB20220912A (observation of 26-Aug.-2023, see Table
2
).
Top
: De-dispersed downsampled time series normalised to the burst peak. The red line shows the Gaussian fit to the burst profile.
Centre
: Dynamic spectrum. For clearer inspection, a downsampling of 32 frequency channels is applied.
Bottom
: Butterfly diagram showing the distribution of the time series around different DM values.
Table 2:
Example of main entries in the logfile for FRB20220912A (observation of 26-Aug.-2023, see Figure
2
).
Source Name
FRB20220912A
Source RA (J2000)
23:09:04.9
Source DEC (J2000)
+48:42:25.4
Time stamp of first sample (MJD)
60182.077245883971
Observation length (minutes)
34.1
Original relative TOA (s)
786.5767
Time stamp of first sample cutout (MJD)
60182.086338206886
Beam correction factor
1.036
Cutout relative TOA (s)
1.0
SK masking fraction
0.00098
Downsampled bins
256
Temporal window (ms)
200
Downsampled time (
μ
\mu
s)
781.25
Norm. Gauss Amp.
0.98
Err. Norm. Gauss Amp.
0.06
Fit Width (ms)
4.3
Err. Fit Width (ms)
0.3
Fit gauss center (ms wrt TOA)
-0.035
SNR peak
10
SNR integrated
25
Gauss fit Chi2red
1.04
Flux density peak (Jy)
12.8
Err. Flux density peak (Jy)
0.8
Rectangular Fluence (Jy ms)
54
Err. Rectangular Fluence (Jy ms)
5
Gaussian Fluence (Jy ms)
55
Err. Gaussian Fluence (Jy ms)
5
Fit DM (pc cm-3)
220
Err. Fit DM (pc cm-3)
2
Topocentric TOA at chan1 (UTC)
2023-08-26 02:04:20.621
Topocentric TOA at infinite frequency (UTC)
2023-08-26 02:04:15.343
Topocentric TOA at infinite frequency (MJD)
60182.086288693856
We aim to provide the community with access to the NC–FRB data. Raw voltages and beam-formed data are necessary for independent reprocessing, especially to recover potential bursts that may have been undetected due to limitations of the current pipelines. In practice, in the perspective of data storage and in view of the NG-Croce upgrade, preserving and distributing these data for both FRB detections and non-detections is unsustainable in the long term. On the other hand, a catalogue reporting physical quantities derived from the burst analysis is essential, but alone it does not enable independent verification of these values.
The
INCART
database serves both as a catalogue of FRB properties and as a repository of short time chunks of fully processed filterbank datasets containing the FRB event. This design minimises storage requirements, ensures long-term scalability, provides science-ready data products, and offers the possibility for users to analyse the FRB properties with independent methods.
INCART
is tailored for the NC–FRB project and provides a basic querying system, with search options by FRB name and observation date. In contrast, the
Istituto Nazionale di Astrofisica
(INAF) Radio Data Archive
3
3
3
http://radioarchive.inaf.it/
is the national infrastructure that archives and distributes data from all Italian radio facilities, developed prior to and independently from
INCART
for general purposes. For consistency between the two services, the same cutout filterbank datasets available in
INCART
, accompanied by metadata for instrumental, observational, and provenance information, will also be accessible in the Radio Archive, which offers a more advanced and flexible querying system.
The products retrievable via
INCART
are the result of the NC
archivist
pipeline, which was developed for the specific purpose of preparing sets of data curated with homogeneous methods. Therefore,
archivist
was also run on previously published NC–FRB data
(Trudu et al.,
2022
; Pelliciari et al.,
2023
,
2024
)
for consistency with the whole collection. In Sections
3.1
,
3.2
we describe the implemented procedure.
3.1
FRB analysis steps
The
archivist
v. 1.0 pipeline requires the processed filterbank dataset (Section
2
) containing the confirmed FRB event, which we will refer to as the ‘original’ dataset. The fundamental input parameters, which can be obtained for example from
HEIMDALL
, are i) the time of arrival relative to the observation start (rToA), which is referred to the maximum frequency channel (
ν
max
\nu_{\rm max}
, Table
1
), ii) width (
W
W
), which is the FWHM of the burst profile, and iii) DM. The input values of
W
W
and DM need to be representative priors, but they are then refined by the analysis. In the following, we describe the steps displayed in the flowchart of Figure
1
, which lead to the final data products accessible in
INCART
. The detailed calculations performed by
archivist
are reported in Section
3.2
.
1.
Metadata from the header of the original dataset are saved in a logfile. The logfile will be progressively updated with additional metadata that are not included in the header and results of the FRB analysis.
2.
The sensitivity of transit telescopes towards a specific direction varies in time during an observing run. The attenuation of the signal needs to be corrected by a factor
f
beam
​
(
rToA
)
f_{\rm beam}({\rm rToA})
, which is computed from the total observing time and the NC beam parameters (see e.g.
Geminardi et al.
2025
for details).
3.
Based on the input
W
W
and DM values, the original dataset is cut out in time around rTOA. This ‘cutout’ dataset contains a few seconds of observation centred on the FRB event, typically reducing the data size from
∼
50
\sim 50
GB to
∼
30
\sim 30
MB, and enabling sustainable preservation and easy distribution. Subsequent steps will be performed on the cutout dataset.
4.
Possible RFI is identified using a spectral kurtosis filter
(Vrabie et al.,
2003
; Nita et al.,
2019
)
, and individual time–frequency samples exceeding a
5
​
σ
SK
5\sigma_{\rm SK}
threshold are masked. Given that the analysis is performed on a short cutout centred on the burst, this approach is adequate and does not require flagging of entire frequency channels or time intervals. The typical fraction of masked samples is
ξ
SK
≲
1
%
\xi_{\rm SK}\lesssim 1\%
.
5.
Data are de-dispersed around the input DM. A proper downsampling is then applied taking into account the input burst width and cutout length, preserving a sufficient number of temporal bins to fit the FRB profile and estimate the noise level. Specifically, downsampling is performed with the
local_resize_mean
function within the
scikit-image
python package
(van der Walt et al.,
2014
)
, yielding to a number of temporal bins scaling as a power of 2 within a narrow (a few hundreds of ms) time window. Such procedure optimises the SNR, while typically decreasing the temporal resolution from
∼
0.1
\sim 0.1
ms to
∼
1
\sim 1
ms.
6.
All frequency channels are averaged to obtain the de-dispersed time series, which is then normalised by the peak value for clearer inspection. The time series is fitted with a Gaussian function, providing best-fit values of its centre, amplitude (
A
A
), and standard deviation (
σ
\sigma
). The obtained
A
A
and
σ
\sigma
are used to compute the SNR, which provides flux density and fluence measurements after conversion from instrumental to physical units.
7.
The representative DM used in previous steps is the result of FRB searching algorithms (Section
2
) and is thus adequate for the burst characterisation. For refinement and uncertainty estimation, values within the range
DM
±
0.1
×
DM
{\rm DM}\pm 0.1\times{\rm DM}
are tested. This range is sampled with 256 steps (providing sufficient DM resolution, while keeping the computational cost manageable), and the data are de-dispersed at each DM. We consider the DM that maximises the SNR, DM
max
, as the best estimate.
8.
Using rToA, the absolute topocentric ToA (referred to
ν
max
\nu_{\rm max}
) is computed. This is scaled to
ν
→
∞
\nu\rightarrow\infty
by correcting for the dispersive delay assuming
DM
=
DM
max
{\rm DM=DM}_{\rm max}
.
The products stored in
INCART
are the cutout filterbank dataset as obtained from step 3, the logfile, and sets of plots showing the normalised de-dispersed time series, dynamic spectrum, and time-DM (‘butterfly’) diagram. Examples of the logfile and output plots for the repeating source FRB20220912A (observation date: 26-Aug.-2023) are shown in Table
2
and Figure
2
.
3.2
Procedures and equations
Figure 3:
Example of
SNR
int
{\rm SNR_{int}}
-DM distribution for FRB20220912A (Figure
2
, Table
2
). The value of DM
max
(orange solid line) is the DM maximising
SNR
int
{\rm SNR_{int}}
(step 7 in Section
3.1
). The corresponding uncertainty range (red dotted lines) consists of the DM values providing a decrease of the maximum
SNR
int
{\rm SNR_{int}}
by the
10
%
10\%
(blue dashed line).
In this Section we report the detailed procedures performed by the NC
archivist
v. 1.0 pipeline following the steps described in Section
3.1
. We assume that the FRB time series can be described by a Gaussian profile in the form:
G
​
(
t
)
=
A
​
e
−
1
2
​
(
t
−
rToA
σ
)
2
,
G(t)=Ae^{-\frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{t-{\rm rToA}}{\sigma}\right)^{2}}\;\;\;,
(1)
where
A
A
is the amplitude (in units of
s
−
1
{\rm s}^{-1}
),
σ
=
W
/
8
​
ln
⁡
2
\sigma=W/\sqrt{8\ln{2}}
is the standard deviation (with
W
=
FWHM
W={\rm FWHM}
, in units of
s
{\rm s}
), and rToA is the time of arrival relative to the observation starting time. Integrating
G
​
(
t
)
G(t)
over time in
rToA
±
N
​
σ
{\rm rToA}\pm N\sigma
, the resulting area is:
𝒜
Gauss
=
∫
rToA
−
N
​
σ
rToA
+
N
​
σ
G
​
(
t
)
​
d
t
=
A
​
2
​
π
​
σ
​
f
​
(
N
)
,
\mathcal{A}_{\rm Gauss}=\int^{{\rm rToA}+N\sigma}_{{\rm rToA}-N\sigma}G(t){\rm d}t=A\sqrt{2\pi}\sigma f(N)\;\;\;,
(2)
where
f
​
(
N
)
=
1
f(N)=1
for
N
→
∞
N\rightarrow\infty
. In our analysis, the time series is normalised to its peak value, implying that the fitted amplitude is expected to be
A
∼
1
​
s
−
1
A\sim 1\;{\rm s}^{-1}
for FRBs with a single burst. The goodness of the fit is evaluated through the reduced
χ
2
\chi^{2}
. We considered integration limits with
N
=
2
N=2
, thus setting
f
​
(
2
)
∼
0.95
f(2)\sim 0.95
in Equation
2
(see below the motivation for this choice).
The fitted parameters are used to compute the FRB flux density and fluence. The flux density of the peak is obtained as
S
p
=
SNR
p
×
σ
therm
,
S_{\rm p}={\rm SNR}_{\rm p}\times\sigma_{\rm therm}\;\;\;,
(3)
where
SNR
p
=
A
/
σ
std
{\rm SNR}_{\rm p}=A/\sigma_{\rm std}
is the ratio of the amplitude to the standard deviation of the noise computed in off-burst bins (that is, beyond the considered integration limits), and
σ
therm
\sigma_{\rm therm}
is the thermal noise (in units of Jy). The thermal noise is computed from the radiometer equation
(Lorimer & Kramer,
2012
)
as:
σ
therm
=
SEFD
A
rec
​
N
pol
×
BW
×
(
1
−
ξ
)
×
t
samp
,
\sigma_{\rm therm}=\frac{{\rm SEFD}}{A_{\rm rec}\sqrt{N_{\rm pol}\times{\rm BW}\times(1-\xi)\times t_{\rm samp}}}\;\;\;,
(4)
where
SEFD
{\rm SEFD}
is the system equivalent flux density,
A
rec
=
4
×
N
cyl
A_{\rm rec}=4\times{\rm N}_{\rm cyl}
is the number of receivers based on the number of working cylinders,
N
pol
N_{\rm pol}
is the number of recorded polarisations,
BW
{\rm BW}
is the bandwidth,
ξ
\xi
is the fraction of masked time-frequency samples (we assumed
ξ
=
ξ
SK
\xi=\xi_{\rm SK}
, based on step 4 in Section
3.1
), and
t
samp
t_{\rm samp}
is the considered sampling time. For the NC,
SEFD
=
8400
±
420
{\rm SEFD}=8400\pm 420
Jy
(Trudu et al.,
2022
)
,
N
pol
=
1
N_{\rm pol}=1
, and
BW
=
14.8
{\rm BW}=14.8
MHz (Table
1
).
For a comparison with previous works on NC–FRBs
(Trudu et al.,
2022
; Pelliciari et al.,
2024
; Geminardi et al.,
2025
)
, we derived the fluence via two different methods. In the first method, the ‘rectangular’ fluence is computed as the area of a rectangle having sides equal to
S
p
S_{\rm p}
and
W
W
, being:
F
rect
=
S
p
×
W
.
F_{\rm rect}=S_{\rm p}\times W\;\;\;.
(5)
In the second method, we took into account the whole duration of the burst, which provides a more effective SNR estimate, rather than using only the peak. Such SNR is given by:
SNR
int
=
𝒜
Gauss
σ
std
​
N
bin
​
t
samp
,
{\rm SNR}_{\rm int}=\frac{\mathcal{A}_{\rm Gauss}}{\sigma_{\rm std}\sqrt{N_{\rm bin}}t_{\rm samp}}\;\;\;,
(6)
where
N
bin
=
W
/
t
samp
N_{\rm bin}=W/t_{\rm samp}
is the number of temporal bins covering the burst FWHM, thus allowing a proper comparison between the FRB and noise level. The corresponding thermal noise,
σ
therm
,
int
\sigma_{\rm therm,int}
, is obtained as in Equation
4
by substituting
t
samp
t_{\rm samp}
with
W
W
to take into account the burst duration. The ‘Gaussian’ fluence is thus computed as:
F
Gauss
=
SNR
int
×
σ
therm
,
int
×
W
.
F_{\rm Gauss}={\rm SNR}_{\rm int}\times\sigma_{\rm therm,int}\times W\;\;\;.
(7)
As a rough estimate, the accuracy in the calculation of the fluence via the two methods described above is provided by the ratio of the rectangular (
𝒜
rect
=
A
×
W
\mathcal{A}_{\rm rect}=A\times W
) to Gaussian areas:
𝒜
rect
𝒜
Gauss
=
4
​
ln
⁡
2
π
​
1
f
​
(
N
)
∼
0.94
f
​
(
N
)
.
\frac{\mathcal{A}_{\rm rect}}{\mathcal{A}_{\rm Gauss}}=\sqrt{\frac{4\ln 2}{\pi}}\frac{1}{f(N)}\sim\frac{0.94}{f(N)}\;\;\;.
(8)
Under the assumption that the profile in Equation
1
is a good representation of the data, Equation
8
shows that for
N
=
2
N=2
the two methods are approximately equivalent.
The logfile reports the peak flux density and fluences calculated with the rectangular and Gaussian methods as described above. Within
INCART
, these values are multiplied by
f
beam
​
(
rToA
)
f_{\rm beam}({\rm rToA})
to correct for the beam attenuation (step 2 in Section
3.1
). The errors on
S
peak
S_{\rm peak}
and
W
W
are obtained from the fitting uncertainty on
A
A
and
σ
\sigma
, respectively. Following the standard propagation error formula, we computed errors on the fluences.
The DM-time analysis producing the butterfly diagram (step 7 in Section
3.1
) shows the signal intensity as a function of time and trial DM values, obtained by de-dispersing the data over a range of DMs. This yields a DM value,
DM
max
{\rm DM}_{\rm max}
, which maximizes
SNR
int
{\rm SNR_{int}}
. To estimate the uncertainty on
DM
max
{\rm DM}_{\rm max}
, we considered the distribution of
SNR
int
{\rm SNR_{int}}
, and derived the range of DM where the maximum
SNR
int
{\rm SNR_{int}}
value decreases by
10
%
10\%
4
4
4
This threshold is empirical and was found to provide a robust estimate of the DM uncertainty, capturing the width of the peak in the SNR curve and avoiding sensitivity to small-scale fluctuations.
(see Figure
3
). If such DM range is not symmetric with respect to
DM
max
{\rm DM}_{\rm max}
, the error is obtained as the largest value between the lower and upper limit. This procedure yields relative DM uncertainties of the order of
∼
0.1
−
1
%
\sim 0.1-1\%
.
The obtained
DM
max
{\rm DM}_{\rm max}
is used to derive the absolute arrival time of the burst in a topocentric reference system at infinite frequency. In modified Julian day (MJD) units, the absolute ToA at the highest frequency channel (
ν
max
\nu_{\rm max}
in Table
1
) is computed as
ToA
ν
max
=
t
0
MJD
+
rToA
86400
.
{\rm ToA}_{\rm\nu_{\rm max}}=\frac{t_{0}}{{\rm MJD}}+\frac{\rm rToA}{86400}\;\;\;.
(9)
The ToA is finally corrected by the dispersive delay and referred to
ν
→
∞
\nu\rightarrow\infty
as
ToA
∞
=
ToA
ν
max
MJD
−
k
86400
×
DM
max
ν
max
2
,
{\rm ToA}_{\rm\infty}=\frac{{\rm ToA}_{\nu_{\rm max}}}{{\rm MJD}}-\frac{k}{86400}\times\frac{\rm DM_{max}}{\nu_{\rm max}^{2}}\;\;\;,
(10)
where
k
=
4148.808
​
s
​
MHz
2
​
cm
3
​
pc
−
1
k=4148.808\;{\rm s\;MHz^{2}\;cm^{3}\;pc^{-1}\;}
is the dispersion constant relating the delay with DM and
ν
\nu
.
3.3
Caveats and improvements
Figure 4:
Diagnostic plots for FRB20220912A (observation of 22-Aug.-2023). The FRB profile shows a decaying tail that is not adequately reproduced by the considered Gaussian profile.
Figure 5:
Diagnostic plots for FRB20240114A (observation of 17-Mar.-2024) showing sub-structure in the time series. The two main bursts were fitted separately after masking. The white stripes in the dynamic spectrum and butterfly diagram indicate the masked time bins during fitting of each considered burst.
The header of the cutout dataset is partly inherited from the original dataset. There could be missing or wrong entries that need to be properly fixed, and this is done in the logfile to avoid manipulating the rigid filterbank-format structure. In this section, we focus on some caveats regarding the NC–FRB data.
The recorded observation start time reported in the header of the cutout dataset is the one of the original dataset. For independent calculation of the absolute ToA, which would be otherwise not possible, a keyword indicating the cutout starting time is added in the logfile. For 4 out of 29 datasets the starting time was not correctly written in the header due to technical issues during the data acquisition. In such cases, the observation date was fixed in the logfile, but the absolute ToA of the FRB cannot be properly recovered, therefore a warning note and a value of
ToA
=
−
1
{\rm ToA}=-1
are reported.
The current version (v. 1.0) of
archivist
performs the fitting of the burst profile with a single Gaussian function. However, the shape of FRB profiles may depart from a simple Gaussian function, exhibiting for example decaying tails or secondary bursts (e.g.
Thornton et al.
2013
; Champion et al.
2016
; Zhu et al.
2020
; Jankowski et al.
2023
). In general, the Gaussian profile is an adequate representation of the NC–FRB profiles observed to date, as also indicated by the typical
χ
red
2
∼
1
\chi_{\rm red}^{2}\sim 1
. Nonetheless, as shown in Figure
4
as an example, the profile of FRB20220912A observed on 22-Aug.-2023 exhibits a decaying tail. In this case, the Gaussian profile is not able to fully reproduce the tail, yielding a worse
χ
red
2
∼
1.74
\chi_{\rm red}^{2}\sim 1.74
. More complex fitting functions could become necessary as the number of bursts detected by the NC with non-Gaussian morphologies increase. Accordingly, future releases of
archivist
may include alternative models to better reproduce the observed profiles.
When dealing with sub-bursts,
archivist
includes the possibility of temporal masking, which reduces contamination and improves the fit goodness of a specific burst. As a representative example, we reported in Figure
5
the case of FRB20240114A (observation of 17-Mar.-2024), which shows multiple close sub-bursts. We fitted the two brightest bursts separately with a Gaussian function, while masking the other peaks to improve the fidelity of the fit. The two secondary bursts remain currently unmodelled in our analysis. Although not implemented in
archivist
, a possible strategy for dealing with close sub-bursts is the simultaneous fitting of multiple Gaussian components.
We stress that the FRB shape depends on the temporal resolution. While the performed temporal downsampling improves the burst SNR, possible sub-structures might be smoothed. Studying the burst profiles at high resolution is beyond the scope of the present work, but this will be possible for
INCART
users thanks to the availability of cutout data saved at the temporal resolution of
τ
samp
=
138
​
μ
​
s
\tau_{\rm samp}=138\;{\rm\mu s}
.
4
Discussion
Figure 6:
Expected data size with increasing number of FRB detections from the NC. Curves report data sizes for total beam-formed plus processed (black), beam-formed (green), processed (blue), and cutout (red) data based on typical single data size of present NC observations. The vertical line refers to the number of FRBs detected as of the end of 2025.
Data storage is nowadays a key challenge of all radio observatories. Depending on the data format, several techniques have been developed to efficiently reduce the data size. The data stored in
INCART
are in filterbank format and consist of short cut outs (a few seconds) around the burst. This procedure of temporal extraction from the entire observation allows us to save a remarkably large amount of disk space, as shown in Figure
6
. Based on the current data rate (see Section
2
), we estimate that with 900 FRB events (a factor of 30 higher than the present NC detections), the beam-formed plus processed filterbank datasets would occupy a volume of
∼
260
\sim 260
TB (with the processed data being
∼
40
\sim 40
TB). Such number of detections are expected to be reached within
∼
6
\sim 6
yr after the NC upgrade completion (
Locatelli et al.
2020
). The cutout strategy, with consequent removal of beam-formed and processed datasets, reduces the data size by a factor of
∼
10
4
\sim 10^{4}
, thus optimising the data volume for long-term storage.
Different solutions have been adopted by other international FRB detectors for data access, which is typically limited to short fractions of the total observing time to contain the large data volume. For a comparison with
INCART
, we provide an overview of the services offered by some facilities. The Canadian Hydrogen Intensity Mapping Experiment (CHIME;
Bandura et al.
2014
; CHIME Collaboration et al.
2022
) provides open access both to a database
5
5
5
https://www.chime-frb.ca
presenting derived physical quantities and to the Canadian Advanced Network for Astronomical Research (CANFAR
6
6
6
https://www.canfar.net/storage/list/AstroDataCitationDOI/CISTI.CANFAR/
) collecting dynamic spectra in hierarchical data format (HDF5) for diagnostic inspection. For some events, HDF5 advanced data products are also made public for independent re-analysis
(CHIME/FRB Collaboration et al.,
2024
)
. The MeerTRAP project
(Sanidas et al.,
2018
)
performs a real-time, commensal transient search with MeerKAT and reports discovery products via publications and the SARAO
7
7
7
https://archive.sarao.ac.za
archive. However, a public database similar to those by CHIME and the NC has not yet been announced. The Australian Square Kilometre Array Pathfinder (ASKAP) monitoring through the Commensal Real-time ASKAP Fast Transients (CRAFT;
Scott et al.
2025
) survey provides a public archive
8
8
8
https://researchdata.edu.au/craft-high-time-release-1
with dynamic spectra as NumPy-format arrays and diagnostic products. For selected events, raw voltages and processed data enabling independent re-analysis are also available. Finally,
Zhang et al. (
2020
)
developed a database tailored for the Parkes radio telescope. Specifically, the stored data products include small data segments containing single pulse signals (both candidate transient phenomena and RFI) obtained from reprocessing of archival observations with advanced homogeneous methods. In summary, regardless of the variety of formats for the data products,
INCART
aligns with the strategies adopted by other services, aiming at limiting the data volume and offering manageable datasets.
5
Summary and conclusions
In this work, we presented
INCART
, a public online repository that provides the community with access to advanced data products of FRB events detected by the NC radio telescope. Specifically,
INCART
collects the catalogue of NC-FRBs, which can be consulted online or downloaded in FITS format, and manageable processed datasets in filterbank format suitable for independent analysis of the FRB properties. As the physical parameters were derived through homogenous procedures (Sections
3.1
,
3.2
) that might not be optimal for complex bursts, such independent analysis may include, for instance, fitting the FRB with alternative profiles beyond a simple Gaussian, or investigating possible sub-structure at high temporal resolution (Section
3.3
). Moreover, the usage of the NC-FRB data products in synergy with those from other detectors enables, for example, multi-epoch and multi-frequency studies of FRBs.
The large data volume to be stored, which is a common challenge for all radio facilities and especially FRB detectors observing at high temporal resolution, is handled by saving in
INCART
only short time segments of interest. This strategy guarantees the optimisation of the disk space for long-term storage (Section
4
). Furthermore, in the view of the planned transient real-time buffer
(Naldi et al.,
2025
)
, improved real-time searching algorithms are under development
(Camilleri et al.,
2026
)
, which will also reduce the short-term data size.
In conclusion, the scalable design of
INCART
will also ensure access to the FRB data products of the NG-Croce in the next years. The incoming upgrade of the NC will significantly improve the instrumental capabilities, allowing the exploitation of all N-S cylinders, the E-W arm, and the multi-beam observing mode. These will lead to improvements in sensitivity, field of view, and localisation, further enhancing the scientific role of the NC-FRB project and the value of its data products for the community.
References
Agarwal et al. (2020)
Agarwal, D., Aggarwal, K., Burke-Spolaor, S., Lorimer, D. R., & Garver-Daniels, N. 2020, MNRAS, 497, 1661
Astropy Collaboration et al. (2018)
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sipőcz, B. M., et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 123
Astropy Collaboration et al. (2013)
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, A&A, 558, A33
Bailes (2022)
Bailes, M. 2022, Science, 378, abj3043
Bandura et al. (2014)
Bandura, K., Addison, G. E., Amiri, M., et al. 2014, in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 9145, Ground-based and Airborne Telescopes V, ed. L. M. Stepp, R. Gilmozzi, & H. J. Hall, 914522
Bannister et al. (2019)
Bannister, K. W., Deller, A. T., Phillips, C., et al. 2019, Science, 365, 565
Barsdell et al. (2012)
Barsdell, B. R., Bailes, M., Barnes, D. G., & Fluke, C. J. 2012, MNRAS, 422, 379
Bhandari & Flynn (2021)
Bhandari, S. & Flynn, C. 2021, Universe, 7, 85
Bianchi et al. (2023)
Bianchi, G., Perini, F., & Setti, G. 2023, in 2023 8th IEEE History of Electrotechnology Conference (HISTELCON), 175–178
Camilleri et al. (2026)
Camilleri, H., Magro, A., Geminardi, A., et al. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2603.16345
Casentini et al. (2025)
Casentini, C., Verrecchia, F., Tavani, M., Pilia, M., & Pacciani, L. 2025, ApJ, 983, 85
Champion et al. (2016)
Champion, D. J., Petroff, E., Kramer, M., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 460, L30
CHIME Collaboration et al. (2022)
CHIME Collaboration, Amiri, M., Bandura, K., et al. 2022, ApJS, 261, 29
Chime/Frb Collaboration et al. (2026)
Chime/Frb Collaboration, Abbott, T., Andersen, B. C., et al. 2026, ApJS, 283, 34
CHIME/FRB Collaboration et al. (2024)
CHIME/FRB Collaboration, Amiri, M., Andersen, B. C., et al. 2024, ApJ, 969, 145
CHIME/FRB Collaboration et al. (2019)
CHIME/FRB Collaboration, Andersen, B. C., Bandura, K., et al. 2019, ApJL, 885, L24
Chime/Frb Collaboration et al. (2023)
Chime/Frb Collaboration, Andersen, B. C., Bandura, K., et al. 2023, ApJ, 947, 83
Colla et al. (1970)
Colla, G., Fanti, C., Ficarra, A., et al. 1970, A&AS, 1, 281
Cordes & Chatterjee (2019)
Cordes, J. M. & Chatterjee, S. 2019, ARA&A, 57, 417
Fanti et al. (1974)
Fanti, C., Fanti, R., Ficarra, A., & Padrielli, L. 1974, A&AS, 18, 147
Geminardi et al. (2025)
Geminardi, A., Esposito, P., Bernardi, G., et al. 2025, A&A, 700, A19
Harris et al. (2020)
Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al. 2020, Nature, 585, 357
Hunter (2007)
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering, 9, 90
James et al. (2022)
James, C. W., Ghosh, E. M., Prochaska, J. X., et al. 2022, MNRAS, 516, 4862
Jankowski et al. (2023)
Jankowski, F., Bezuidenhout, M. C., Caleb, M., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 524, 4275
Kirsten et al. (2024)
Kirsten, F., Ould-Boukattine, O. S., Herrmann, W., et al. 2024, Nature Astronomy, 8, 337
Locatelli et al. (2020)
Locatelli, N. T., Bernardi, G., Bianchi, G., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 494, 1229
Lorimer (2011)
Lorimer, D. R. 2011, SIGPROC: Pulsar Signal Processing Programs, Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:1107.016
Lorimer et al. (2007)
Lorimer, D. R., Bailes, M., McLaughlin, M. A., Narkevic, D. J., & Crawford, F. 2007, Science, 318, 777
Lorimer & Kramer (2012)
Lorimer, D. R. & Kramer, M. 2012, Handbook of Pulsar Astronomy
Macquart et al. (2020)
Macquart, J.-P., Prochaska, J. X., McQuinn, M., et al. 2020, Nature, 581, 391
Morello et al. (2022)
Morello, V., Rajwade, K. M., & Stappers, B. W. 2022, MNRAS, 510, 1393
Naldi et al. (2025)
Naldi, G., Magro, A., Fiori, F., et al. 2025, in 2025 URSI Asia-Pacific Radio Science Meeting (AP-RASC), 1–4
Nita et al. (2019)
Nita, G. M., Gary, D. E., & Hellbourg, G. 2019, in The Astrobiology Science Conference (AbSciCon) 2019, 320–221
Pedani & Grueff (1999)
Pedani, M. & Grueff, G. 1999, A&A, 350, 368
Pelliciari et al. (2024)
Pelliciari, D., Bernardi, G., Pilia, M., et al. 2024, A&A, 690, A219
Pelliciari et al. (2023)
Pelliciari, D., Bernardi, G., Pilia, M., et al. 2023, A&A, 674, A223
Petroff et al. (2019)
Petroff, E., Hessels, J. W. T., & Lorimer, D. R. 2019, A&AR, 27, 4
Pilia et al. (2020)
Pilia, M., Burgay, M., Possenti, A., et al. 2020, ApJL, 896, L40
Ransom et al. (2002)
Ransom, S. M., Eikenberry, S. S., & Middleditch, J. 2002, AJ, 124, 1788
Sanidas et al. (2018)
Sanidas, S., Caleb, M., Driessen, L., et al. 2018, in IAU Symposium, Vol. 337, Pulsar Astrophysics the Next Fifty Years, ed. P. Weltevrede, B. B. P. Perera, L. L. Preston, & S. Sanidas, 406–407
Scott et al. (2025)
Scott, D. R., Dial, T., Bera, A., et al. 2025, PASA, 42, e133
Shah et al. (2025)
Shah, V., Shin, K., Leung, C., et al. 2025, ApJL, 979, L21
Spitler et al. (2016)
Spitler, L. G., Scholz, P., Hessels, J. W. T., et al. 2016, Nature, 531, 202
Tendulkar et al. (2017)
Tendulkar, S. P., Bassa, C. G., Cordes, J. M., et al. 2017, ApJL, 834, L7
Thornton et al. (2013)
Thornton, D., Stappers, B., Bailes, M., et al. 2013, Science, 341, 53
Trudu et al. (2022)
Trudu, M., Pilia, M., Bernardi, G., et al. 2022, MNRAS, 513, 1858
van der Walt et al. (2014)
van der Walt, S., Schönberger, J. L., Nunez-Iglesias, J., et al. 2014, PeerJ, 2, e453
van Straten & Bailes (2011)
van Straten, W. & Bailes, M. 2011, PASA, 28, 1
Virtanen et al. (2020)
Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020, Nature Methods, 17, 261
Vrabie et al. (2003)
Vrabie, V., Granjon, P., & Serviere, C. 2003, in Proceedings of the 6th IEEE International Workshop on Nonlinear Signal and Image Processing, Grado-Trieste, Italy
Wu et al. (2022)
Wu, Q., Zhang, G.-Q., & Wang, F.-Y. 2022, MNRAS, 515, L1
Zhang (2023)
Zhang, B. 2023, Reviews of Modern Physics, 95, 035005
Zhang et al. (2023)
Zhang, J.-G., Zhao, Z.-W., Li, Y., et al. 2023, Science China Physics, Mechanics, and Astronomy, 66, 120412
Zhang et al. (2020)
Zhang, S.-B., Hobbs, G., Russell, C. J., et al. 2020, ApJS, 249, 14
Zhao et al. (2023)
Zhao, Z.-W., Wang, L.-F., Zhang, J.-G., Zhang, J.-F., & Zhang, X. 2023, JCAP, 2023, 022
Zhu et al. (2020)
Zhu, W., Li, D., Luo, R., et al. 2020, ApJL, 895, L6
Acknowledgements.
The authors thank the referee for carefully reading our manuscript and providing valuable comments and suggestions. LB acknowledges F. Bedosti, G. Lorenzo, A. Magro, and N. Ragno for IT support and suggestions. The research activities described in this paper were carried out with contribution of the NextGenerationEU funds within the National Recovery and Resilience Plan (PNRR), Mission 4 - Education and Research, Component 2 - From Research to Business (M4C2), Investment Line 3.1 - Strengthening and creation of Research Infrastructures, Project IR0000026 – Next Generation Croce del Nord. This research made use Astropy, a community-developed core Python package for Astronomy
(Astropy Collaboration et al.
2013
,
2018
)
, Matplotlib
(Hunter
2007
)
, NumPy
(Harris et al.
2020
)
, SciPy
(Virtanen et al.
2020
)
. This research made use of SigPyProc (
https://github.com/FRBs/sigpyproc3
), a Python package for FRB and pulsar data analysis.
Data Availability
The data and corresponding products (catalogues, diagnostic plots, logfiles) described in this work can be retrieved via
INCART
. The same data are also accessible via the INAF Radio Data Archive. A simplified version of the
archivist
pipeline performing key steps of the FRB analysis chain is under development, and will soon become available to be shared upon request.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA