Encore: Conditioning Trajectory Forecasting via Biased Ego Rehearsals
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
I
Introduction
II
Related Works
III
Method
IV
Experiments
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2605.11463v1 [cs.CV] 12 May 2026
Encore: Conditioning Trajectory Forecasting via Biased Ego Rehearsals
Conghao Wong,
Ziqian Zou,
and Xinge You
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62172177.
(Corresponding author: Xinge You.)
Conghao Wong, Ziqian Zou, and Xinge You are with Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, Hubei, China.
(Email:
conghaowong@icloud.com
,
ziqianzoulive@icloud.com,
youxg@mail.hust.edu.cn).

Code is available at
https://github.com/cocoon2wong/Encore
.
Abstract
Learning and representing the subjectivities of agents has become a challenging but crucial problem in the trajectory prediction task.
Such subjectivities not only present specific spatial or temporal structures, but also are anisotropic for all interaction participants.
Despite great efforts, it remains difficult to explicitly learn and forecast these subjectivities, let alone further modulate models’ predictions through a specific ego’s subjectivity.
Inspired by prefactual thoughts in psychology and relevant theatrical concepts, we interpret such subjectivities in future trajectories as the continuous process from rehearsal to encore.
In the rehearsal phase, the proposed ego predictor focuses on how each ego agent learns to derive and direct a set of explicitly biased rehearsal trajectories for all participants in the scene from the short-term observations.
Then, these rehearsal trajectories serve as immediate controls to condition final predictions, providing direct yet distinct ego biases for the prediction network to simulate agents’ various subjectivities.
Experiments across datasets not only demonstrate a consistent improvement in the performance of the proposed
Encore
trajectory prediction model but also provide clear interpretability regarding subjectivities as biased ego rehearsals.
I
Introduction
II
Related Works
III
Method
IV
Experiments
This section provides experiments and ablation studies to validate the proposed
Encore
trajectory prediction model.
We will also provide further discussions to interpret how the ego predictor collaborates with the final predictor to achieve conditioned predictions using its forecasted ego-biased rehearsals.
References
[1]
A. Alahi, K. Goel, V. Ramanathan, A. Robicquet, L. Fei-Fei, and S. Savarese, “Social lstm: Human trajectory prediction in crowded spaces,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition
, 2016, pp. 961–971.
[2]
W. Chen, H. Sang, J. Wang, and Z. Zhao, “Dstigcn: Deformable spatial-temporal interaction graph convolution network for pedestrian trajectory prediction,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems
, 2025.
[3]
C. Zhou, G. AlRegib, A. Parchami, and K. Singh, “Trajpred: Trajectory prediction with region-based relation learning,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems
, 2024.
[4]
P. Kothari and A. Alahi, “Safety-compliant generative adversarial networks for human trajectory forecasting,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems
, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 4251–4261, 2023.
[5]
D. Rempe, Z. Luo, X. B. Peng, Y. Yuan, K. Kitani, K. Kreis, S. Fidler, and O. Litany, “Trace and pace: Controllable pedestrian animation via guided trajectory diffusion,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01893
, 2023.
[6]
J. Yue, B. Li, J. Pettré, A. Seyfried, and H. Wang, “Human motion prediction under unexpected perturbation,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, 2024, pp. 1501–1511.
[7]
I. Bae, J. Lee, and H.-G. Jeon, “Continuous locomotive crowd behavior generation,” in
Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference
, 2025, pp. 22 416–22 431.
[8]
T. Yagi, K. Mangalam, R. Yonetani, and Y. Sato, “Future person localization in first-person videos,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, 2018, pp. 7593–7602.
[9]
C. Patel, H. Nakamura, Y. Kyuragi, K. Kozuka, J. C. Niebles, and E. Adeli, “Uniegomotion: A unified model for egocentric motion reconstruction, forecasting, and generation,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
, 2025, pp. 10 318–10 329.
[10]
R. Li, T. Qiao, S. Katsigiannis, Z. Zhu, and H. P. Shum, “Unified spatial-temporal edge-enhanced graph networks for pedestrian trajectory prediction,”
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology
, 2025.
[11]
L. Li, M. Pagnucco, and Y. Song, “Graph-based spatial transformer with memory replay for multi-future pedestrian trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, 2022, pp. 2231–2241.
[12]
C. Xu, M. Li, Z. Ni, Y. Zhang, and S. Chen, “Groupnet: Multiscale hypergraph neural networks for trajectory prediction with relational reasoning,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)
, June 2022, pp. 6498–6507.
[13]
I. Bae, J.-H. Park, and H.-G. Jeon, “Learning pedestrian group representations for multi-modal trajectory prediction,” in
European Conference on Computer Vision
. Springer, 2022, pp. 270–289.
[14]
Z. Zou, C. Wong, B. Xia, and X. You, “Who walks with you matters: Perceiving social interactions with groups for pedestrian trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
, 2025, pp. 4844–4853.
[15]
L. Rossi, M. Paolanti, R. Pierdicca, and E. Frontoni, “Human trajectory prediction and generation using lstm models and gans,”
Pattern Recognition
, vol. 120, p. 108136, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S003132032100323X
[16]
A. Gupta, J. Johnson, L. Fei-Fei, S. Savarese, and A. Alahi, “Social gan: Socially acceptable trajectories with generative adversarial networks,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, 2018, pp. 2255–2264.
[17]
M. Lee, S. S. Sohn, S. Moon, S. Yoon, M. Kapadia, and V. Pavlovic, “Muse-vae: Multi-scale vae for environment-aware long term trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, 2022, pp. 2221–2230.
[18]
P. Xu, J.-B. Hayet, and I. Karamouzas, “Socialvae: Human trajectory prediction using timewise latents,” in
European Conference on Computer Vision
, 2022, pp. 511–528.
[19]
I. Bae, Y.-J. Park, and H.-G. Jeon, “Singulartrajectory: Universal trajectory predictor using diffusion model,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18452
, 2024.
[20]
R. Li, C. Li, D. Ren, G. Chen, Y. Yuan, and G. Wang, “Bcdiff: Bidirectional consistent diffusion for instantaneous trajectory prediction,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
, vol. 36, 2024.
[21]
K. Mangalam, Y. An, H. Girase, and J. Malik, “From goals, waypoints & paths to long term human trajectory forecasting,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
, 2021, pp. 15 233–15 242.
[22]
C. Wong, B. Xia, Z. Zou, Y. Wang, and X. You, “Socialcircle: Learning the angle-based social interaction representation for pedestrian trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, 2024, pp. 19 005–19 015.
[23]
C. Wong, B. Xia, Z. Zou, and X. You, “Socialcircle+: Learning the angle-based conditioned interaction representation for pedestrian trajectory prediction,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.14984
, 2024.
[24]
K. Epstude, A. Scholl, and N. J. Roese, “Prefactual thoughts: Mental simulations about what might happen,”
Review of general psychology
, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 48–56, 2016.
[25]
D. Helbing and P. Molnar, “Social force model for pedestrian dynamics,”
Physical review E
, vol. 51, no. 5, p. 4282, 1995.
[26]
P. Zhang, J. Xue, P. Zhang, N. Zheng, and W. Ouyang, “Social-aware pedestrian trajectory prediction via states refinement lstm,”
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence
, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 2742–2759, 2022.
[27]
Z. Huang, J. Wang, L. Pi, X. Song, and L. Yang, “Lstm based trajectory prediction model for cyclist utilizing multiple interactions with environment,”
Pattern Recognition
, vol. 112, p. 107800, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0031320320306038
[28]
P. Zhang, W. Ouyang, P. Zhang, J. Xue, and N. Zheng, “Sr-lstm: State refinement for lstm towards pedestrian trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, 2019, pp. 12 085–12 094.
[29]
N. Bisagno, B. Zhang, and N. Conci, “Group lstm: Group trajectory prediction in crowded scenarios,” in
Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) workshops
, 2018, pp. 0–0.
[30]
H. Xue, D. Q. Huynh, and M. Reynolds, “Ss-lstm: A hierarchical lstm model for pedestrian trajectory prediction,” in
2018 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV)
. IEEE, 2018, pp. 1186–1194.
[31]
T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907
, 2016.
[32]
L. Shi, L. Wang, C. Long, S. Zhou, M. Zhou, Z. Niu, and G. Hua, “Sgcn: Sparse graph convolution network for pedestrian trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, 2021, pp. 8994–9003.
[33]
K. Lv and L. Yuan, “Skgacn: social knowledge-guided graph attention convolutional network for human trajectory prediction,”
IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement
, 2023.
[34]
C. Liu, Y. Chen, M. Liu, and B. E. Shi, “Avgcn: Trajectory prediction using graph convolutional networks guided by human attention,” in
2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
. IEEE, 2021, pp. 14 234–14 240.
[35]
V. Kosaraju, A. Sadeghian, R. Martín-Martín, I. Reid, H. Rezatofighi, and S. Savarese, “Social-bigat: Multimodal trajectory forecasting using bicycle-gan and graph attention networks,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
, 2019, pp. 137–146.
[36]
A. Mohamed, K. Qian, M. Elhoseiny, and C. Claudel, “Social-stgcnn: A social spatio-temporal graph convolutional neural network for human trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, 2020, pp. 14 424–14 432.
[37]
Y. Huang, H. Bi, Z. Li, T. Mao, and Z. Wang, “Stgat: Modeling spatial-temporal interactions for human trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
, 2019, pp. 6272–6281.
[38]
D. Cao, J. Li, H. Ma, and M. Tomizuka, “Spectral temporal graph neural network for trajectory prediction,” in
2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
. IEEE, 2021, pp. 1839–1845.
[39]
D. Cao, Y. Wang, J. Duan, C. Zhang, X. Zhu, C. Huang, Y. Tong, B. Xu, J. Bai, J. Tong
et al.
, “Spectral temporal graph neural network for multivariate time-series forecasting,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
, vol. 33, pp. 17 766–17 778, 2020.
[40]
P. S. Chib and P. Singh, “Lg-traj: Llm guided pedestrian trajectory prediction,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08032
, 2024.
[41]
I. Bae, J. Lee, and H.-G. Jeon, “Social reasoning-aware trajectory prediction via multimodal language model,”
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
, 2025.
[42]
A. Sadeghian, V. Kosaraju, A. Sadeghian, N. Hirose, H. Rezatofighi, and S. Savarese, “Sophie: An attentive gan for predicting paths compliant to social and physical constraints,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, 2019, pp. 1349–1358.
[43]
P. S. Chib, A. Nath, P. Kabra, I. Gupta, and P. Singh, “Ms-tip: Imputation aware pedestrian trajectory prediction,” in
International Conference on Machine Learning
. PMLR, 2024, pp. 8389–8402.
[44]
W. Mao, C. Xu, Q. Zhu, S. Chen, and Y. Wang, “Leapfrog diffusion model for stochastic trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, 2023, pp. 5517–5526.
[45]
S. Kim, H.-g. Chi, H. Lim, K. Ramani, J. Kim, and S. Kim, “Higher-order relational reasoning for pedestrian trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, 2024, pp. 15 251–15 260.
[46]
C. Wong, Z. Zou, and B. Xia, “Resonance: Learning to predict social-aware pedestrian trajectories as co-vibrations,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
, 2025, pp. 25 788–25 799.
[47]
C. Wong, Z. Zou, B. Xia, and X. You, “Reverberation: Learning the latencies before forecasting trajectories,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.11164
, 2025.
[48]
A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in
Advances in neural information processing systems
, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[49]
S. Pellegrini, A. Ess, K. Schindler, and L. Van Gool, “You’ll never walk alone: Modeling social behavior for multi-target tracking,” in
2009 IEEE 12th International Conference on Computer Vision
. IEEE, 2009, pp. 261–268.
[50]
A. Lerner, Y. Chrysanthou, and D. Lischinski, “Crowds by example,”
Computer Graphics Forum
, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 655–664, 2007.
[51]
A. Robicquet, A. Sadeghian, A. Alahi, and S. Savarese, “Learning social etiquette: Human trajectory understanding in crowded scenes,” in
European conference on computer vision
. Springer, 2016, pp. 549–565.
[52]
J. Liang, L. Jiang, and A. Hauptmann, “Simaug: Learning robust representations from simulation for trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV)
, August 2020.
[53]
J. Liang, L. Jiang, K. Murphy, T. Yu, and A. Hauptmann, “The garden of forking paths: Towards multi-future trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, 2020, pp. 10 508–10 518.
[54]
H. Caesar, V. Bankiti, A. H. Lang, S. Vora, V. E. Liong, Q. Xu, A. Krishnan, Y. Pan, G. Baldan, and O. Beijbom, “nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous driving,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.11027
, 2019.
[55]
S. Saadatnejad, Y. Z. Ju, and A. Alahi, “Pedestrian 3d bounding box prediction,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14195
, 2022.
[56]
Y. Yuan, X. Weng, Y. Ou, and K. M. Kitani, “Agentformer: Agent-aware transformers for socio-temporal multi-agent forecasting,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)
, 2021, pp. 9813–9823.
[57]
K. Linou, D. Linou, and M. de Boer, “Nba player movements,” https://github.com/linouk23/NBA-Player-Movements, 2016.
[58]
C. Xu, W. Mao, W. Zhang, and S. Chen, “Remember intentions: Retrospective-memory-based trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)
, June 2022, pp. 6488–6497.
[59]
C. Yu, X. Ma, J. Ren, H. Zhao, and S. Yi, “Spatio-temporal graph transformer networks for pedestrian trajectory prediction,” in
European Conference on Computer Vision
. Springer, 2020, pp. 507–523.
[60]
K. Mangalam, H. Girase, S. Agarwal, K.-H. Lee, E. Adeli, J. Malik, and A. Gaidon, “It is not the journey but the destination: Endpoint conditioned trajectory prediction,” in
European Conference on Computer Vision
, 2020, pp. 759–776.
[61]
Y. Hu, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, and X. Gu, “Collaborative motion prediction via neural motion message passing,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, 2020, pp. 6319–6328.
[62]
T. Salzmann, B. Ivanovic, P. Chakravarty, and M. Pavone, “Trajectron++: Dynamically-feasible trajectory forecasting with heterogeneous data,” in
Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV)
. Springer, 2020, pp. 683–700.
[63]
C. Wong, B. Xia, Z. Hong, Q. Peng, W. Yuan, Q. Cao, Y. Yang, and X. You, “View vertically: A hierarchical network for trajectory prediction via fourier spectrums,” in
European Conference on Computer Vision
. Springer, 2022, pp. 682–700.
[64]
Y. Wu, L. Wang, S. Zhou, J. Duan, G. Hua, and W. Tang, “Multi-stream representation learning for pedestrian trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
, vol. 37, no. 3, 2023, pp. 2875–2882.
[65]
Y. Choi, R. C. Mercurius, S. M. A. Shabestary, and A. Rasouli, “Dice: Diverse diffusion model with scoring for trajectory prediction,” in
2024 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV)
. IEEE, 2024, pp. 3023–3029.
[66]
Y. Xu and Y. Fu, “Adapting to length shift: Flexilength network for trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, 2024, pp. 15 226–15 237.
[67]
F. Marchetti, F. Becattini, L. Seidenari, and A. Del Bimbo, “Smemo: social memory for trajectory forecasting,”
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
, 2024.
[68]
X. Lin, T. Liang, J. Lai, and J.-F. Hu, “Progressive pretext task learning for human trajectory prediction,” in
European Conference on Computer Vision
. Springer, 2024, pp. 197–214.
[69]
Y. Su, Y. Li, W. Wang, J. Zhou, and X. Li, “A unified environmental network for pedestrian trajectory prediction,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
, vol. 38, no. 5, 2024, pp. 4970–4978.
[70]
Y. Liu, Z. Ye, R. Wang, B. Li, Q. Z. Sheng, and L. Yao, “Uncertainty-aware pedestrian trajectory prediction via distributional diffusion,”
Knowledge-Based Systems
, p. 111862, 2024.
[71]
B. Xia, C. Wong, D. Xu, Q. Peng, and X. You, “Another vertical view: A hierarchical network for heterogeneous trajectory prediction via spectrums,”
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
, 2025.
[72]
H. Yang, Y. Tian, C. Tian, H. Yu, W. Lu, C. Deng, and X. Sun, “Sopermodel: Leveraging social perception for multi-agent trajectory prediction,”
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
, 2025.
[73]
G. Chen, J. Li, J. Lu, and J. Zhou, “Human trajectory prediction via counterfactual analysis,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
, 2021, pp. 9824–9833.
Conghao Wong
received the master’s degree from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, in 2022, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree.
His research interests include computer vision and pattern recognition.
Ziqian Zou
received the master’s degree from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, in 2025, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree.
His research interests include pattern recognition and video understanding.
Xinge You
(Senior Member, IEEE) is currently a Professor in Huazhong University of Science and Technology.
He received his Ph.D. degree from the Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University in 2004.
His work has appeared in 200+ publications, such as IEEE TPAMI, TIP, TNNLS, CVPR, ECCV, ICCV.
He served/serves as an Associate Editor of the
IEEE TCyb
,
TSMCA
.
His research interests include wavelet analysis, pattern recognition, machine learning, and computer vision.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA