The role of the oceans for subseasonal prediction: insights from eddy-permitting and eddy-rich coupled forecast systems
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
2
Methods
2.1
Coupled subseasonal ensemble reforecast (ENS-C)
2.2
Uncoupled subseasonal ensemble reforecasts (ENS-U)
2.3
Eddy-permitting subseasonal reforecasts (LRA-EPO and HRA-EPO)
2.4
Eddy-rich subseasonal reforecasts (LRA-ERO and HRA-ERO)
2.5
Atmospheric circulation indices
2.6
Reanalysis and satellite data
2.7
Verification methods
3
Impacts of ocean-atmosphere coupling in ECMWF S2S forecasts
3.1
Impacts on the mean state
3.2
Impacts on weekly mean forecast anomalies
3.3
Impacts on the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO)
3.4
Impacts on extratropical modes of atmospheric variability
4
Impacts of an eddy-rich ocean
4.1
Eddy-rich initial conditions
4.2
Impacts on the mean state
4.3
Impacts on weekly mean forecast anomalies
5
Discussion and conclusions
A
Ocean and sea ice initial conditions derived from GLORYS12v1
B
Data accessibility
References
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2605.00621v1 [physics.ao-ph] 01 May 2026
The role of the oceans for subseasonal prediction: insights from eddy-permitting and eddy-rich coupled forecast systems
Christopher David Roberts
ECMWF
Shinfield Park
Reading, United Kingdom
chris.roberts@ecmwf.int
&Sarah Keeley
ECMWF
Shinfield Park
Reading, United Kingdom
&Kristian Mogensen
ECMWF
Shinfield Park
Reading, United Kingdom
&Charles Pelletier
ECMWF
Robert-Schuman-Platz 3
Shinfield Park
Bonn, Germany
&Hao Zuo
ECMWF
Shinfield Park
Reading, United Kingdom
Abstract
The oceans play a fundamental role in Earth’s climate system, redistributing heat and influencing global and regional climate variability and predictability across weather and climate timescales. The benefits of ocean-atmosphere coupling for initialised predictions depend on the balance between improvements associated with more realistic air-sea interactions and dynamics, and degradations arising from the development of systematic biases at the coupling interface. Here, we draw on recent developments in modelling and data assimilation at ECMWF to revisit the role of ocean-atmosphere coupling in subseasonal predictions. In particular, we evaluate the impact of ocean-atmosphere coupling in 46-day reforecasts produced with the ECMWF Integrated Forecasting System (IFS) and explore the potential for improvements through increased horizontal resolution and a better representation of the ocean mesoscale. We find that ocean-atmosphere coupling significantly enhances ensemble forecast skill in the tropics, with positive effects increasing at longer lead times. In particular, Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) forecasts are substantially improved, with forecast skill extended by approximately 5 days compared to the uncoupled configuration. In contrast, ocean-atmosphere coupling has a more limited impact on the extratropical atmosphere at subseasonal timescales, with marginal impacts on the predictability of major tropospheric and stratospheric circulation indices. Finally, we present selected results from an experimental eddy-rich coupled configuration of the IFS, with a horizontal ocean resolution of approximately 8 km. We find that a better-resolved representation of the ocean mesoscale has a limited impact on atmospheric forecasts at subseasonal lead times, which suggests that many of the known deficiencies of the eddy-permitting reference configuration are mitigated by accurate initialisation. Nevertheless, other factors may be important when considering the case for an eddy-rich ocean in coupled forecasts, including the potential for higher-resolution and more accurate ocean and sea ice forecast products, impacts on coupled data assimilation, and the influence on extreme weather events.
Keywords
ocean-atmosphere coupling, subseasonal, S2S, forecasting, Madden-Julian Oscillation, predictability
1
Introduction
The oceans are the principal reservoir of heat in the climate system and interact with the atmosphere through exchanges of energy, moisture, and momentum
(Trenberth and Caron,
2001
; Ferrari and Wunsch,
2009
)
. These air-sea interactions influence weather and climate variability across all temporal and spatial scales, from planetary-scale overturning circulations to mixed-layer and diurnal processes in the upper ocean
(Talley,
2013
; Karlowska
et al.
,
2024
)
. At global scales, ocean heat uptake regulates the transient climate response to external forcings and plays a dominant role in Earth’s energy budget
(Gregory and Forster,
2008
; Kuhlbrodt and Gregory,
2012
)
. For example, about 90% of the excess energy associated with top-of-atmosphere (TOA) planetary energy imbalance is absorbed and stored in the oceans
(Levitus
et al.
,
2012
; Von Schuckmann
et al.
,
2023
)
. The oceans also affect regional climate change and variability through their capacity to store and redistribute heat and salt, with important implications for regional weather and climate patterns
(Robson
et al.
,
2012b
; England
et al.
,
2014
; Cassou
et al.
,
2018
)
.
Internal ocean wave dynamics and basin-scale variations in ocean circulation are also important components of coupled climate variability at seasonal-to-decadal timescales
(McPhaden,
1999
; Robson
et al.
,
2012a
)
. In particular, the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon arises from coupled interactions between tropical Pacific sea surface temperature (SST), deep convection, the large-scale atmospheric circulation, and equatorial ocean wave dynamics
(Neelin
et al.
,
1998
)
. The atmospheric heating and upper-troposphere circulation anomalies associated with ENSO events also provide a source of atmospheric Rossby waves, which propagate from the tropics to the extratropics thus establishing a clear pathway for the tropical oceans to influence global weather and climate variability
(Hoskins and Karoly,
1981
; Trenberth
et al.
,
1998
; Alexander
et al.
,
2002
)
. Dynamical representation of the oceans is thus crucial for climate projections and seasonal-to-decadal prediction systems, which rely on the accurate representation of ocean-atmosphere interactions and ocean dynamics to capture predictable signals
(Griffies and Bryan,
1997
; Stockdale
et al.
,
1998
)
.
Many studies have also highlighted the importance of air-sea interactions for the prediction of atmospheric phenomena at lead times of days to weeks
(Bender
et al.
,
2007
; Woolnough
et al.
,
2007
; Brassington
et al.
,
2015
; Mogensen
et al.
,
2017
)
. Of particular relevance for subseasonal forecasting is the role of ocean feedbacks in the representation of climate modes such as the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO), which is the leading mode of intraseasonal variability in the tropics and is characterised by eastward propagating convection and circulation anomalies
(Madden and Julian,
1972
; DeMott
et al.
,
2015
; Balmaseda
et al.
,
2026
)
. Through its global teleconnections, the MJO also influences remote weather patterns, including modulation of extratropical weather regimes, tropical cyclone activity, and monsoon systems
(Hall
et al.
,
2001
; Cassou,
2008
; Lin
et al.
,
2009
; Liu
et al.
,
2022
)
. Several studies have emphasised that ocean feedbacks can improve the representation of intraseasonal oscillations such as the MJO in global climate models
(e.g.  Kemball-Cook
et al.
,
2002
; Zhang
et al.
,
2006
; DeMott
et al.
,
2015
)
. However, the impact of ocean feedbacks on the MJO in free-running coupled climate models can be masked by degradations associated with the development of systematic model biases such that the diagnosed impacts of ocean-atmosphere coupling can be sensitive to the simulated mean state
(Liess
et al.
,
2004
; Sperber,
2004
; DeMott
et al.
,
2015
)
. In contrast, initialised predictions provided a cleaner framework to evaluate the impacts of ocean feedbacks on the MJO due to the limited influence of mean state biases and several studies have demonstrated the positive impacts of ocean-atmosphere coupling for subseasonal MJO predictions
(Woolnough
et al.
,
2007
; Seo
et al.
,
2009
; Shelly
et al.
,
2014
)
.
State-of-the-art subseasonal prediction systems are commonly coupled to ocean models with an ‘eddy-permitting’ horizontal grid spacing of approximately 25 km
(Balmaseda
et al.
,
2026
)
, which is insufficient to fully resolve mesoscale features that scale with the oceanic Rossby radius of deformation (L
R
) in the mid- and high-latitudes or coastal regions
(Hallberg,
2013
; Hewitt
et al.
,
2017
)
. This resolution limitation results in an incomplete or inaccurate representation of important aspects of air-sea interaction and ocean dynamics, which can have significant impacts on the local and remote atmosphere
(Small
et al.
,
2008
; Bryan
et al.
,
2010
; Lee
et al.
,
2018
; Roberts
et al.
,
2021
)
. One manifestation of this problem is that eddy-permitting ocean models often struggle to accurately simulate the location and structure of western boundary currents and their associated sharp gradients in SST
(Roberts
et al.
,
2020
; Chassignet and Xu,
2021
)
. In contrast, higher-resolution ‘eddy-rich’ ocean models provide a more realistic representation of many ocean processes, including more realistic ocean eddy activity, improved ocean heat transports, and reduced sea-surface temperature biases
(Griffies
et al.
,
2015
; Hewitt
et al.
,
2017
; Hirschi
et al.
,
2020
)
. However, the computational expense of eddy-rich ocean models has so-far limited their use within operational coupled forecast systems
(Balmaseda
et al.
,
2026
)
. Furthermore, the potential benefits of an improved representation of the ocean mesoscale for large-scale atmosphere predictability at subseasonal lead times remains unclear
(Roberts
et al.
,
2022
; Reynolds
et al.
,
2025
)
.
In this study, we leverage recent developments in modelling and data assimilation at ECMWF to revisit the role of ocean-atmosphere coupling
1
1
1
Throughout this study we use ‘ocean-atmosphere coupling’ as shorthand to refer to two-way exchange of information between the ocean, sea ice, ocean wave, and atmosphere components of the ECMWF Integrated Forecasting System (IFS). Uncoupled simulations do not include interactive ocean and sea ice models, but retain two-way coupling between the atmosphere and ocean wave models.
in subseasonal predictions. In particular, we answer the following questions:
1.
What is the role of ocean-atmosphere coupling for large-scale atmospheric predictability at lead times of one to six weeks in the IFS model?
2.
Is this assessment sensitive to the specific region, lead time, and atmospheric variable under consideration?
3.
Does increasing ocean model resolution from the ‘eddy-permitting’ to ‘eddy-resolving’ regime change these conclusions?
4.
Are the diagnosed impacts of an eddy-rich ocean sensitive to atmospheric resolution?
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: Section
2
describes the methods and datasets used in this study. Section
3
evaluates the impact of ocean-atmosphere coupling in 46-day ensemble reforecasts with the ECMWF IFS model. Section
4
evaluates the impact of increased ocean resolution using selected results from experimental eddy-rich configurations of the IFS. Section
5
summarises our results and interprets them within the context of previous studies on the role of the oceans for weather and climate modelling. Lastly, this study is a contribution to the special issue
Forecasting in a Changing Climate
and is based on a presentation given by the lead author to the ECMWF 50th anniversary Annual Seminar 2025.
2
Methods
The European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) Integrated Forecasting System (IFS) includes fully-prognostic representations of the atmosphere, ocean, sea ice, land surface, and ocean waves
(ECMWF,
2026
)
. The subseasonal reforecast configurations used in this study are summarised in table
1
and described below, with emphasis on changes relative to the IFS cycle 47r3-based configurations described by
Roberts
et al.
(
2023
)
. The eddy-rich and associated eddy-permitting reference experiments presented in section
4
are conducted with IFS cycle 48r1, whereas the coupling sensitivity experiments used in section
3
are based on the more recent IFS cycle 49r2. These experiments were conducted at different times and the high computational cost of eddy-rich simulations precluded rerunning them with a common IFS cycle. Similarly, the reforecast periods differ between sections due to the availability of suitable ocean initial conditions for each configuration. Nevertheless, the absolute forecast performance of the two IFS cycles is sufficiently similar that scientific insights from one configuration remain relevant for the other, and our main conclusions are robust to these differences, which are highlighted below.
2.1
Coupled subseasonal ensemble reforecast (ENS-C)
Our reference coupled ensemble reforecasts are conducted with IFS cycle 49r2. Although this cycle is not operational for medium-range or subseasonal forecasting at ECMWF, it serves as the foundation for the next ECMWF reanalysis and seasonal forecasting systems. The most relevant model changes for subseasonal forecasting between cycles 47r3 and 49r2 include the following:
•
Cycle 48r1
: The introduction of a multi-layer snow scheme; revised surface boundary conditions; optimisations to parameterised gravity wave drag; a new hybrid-linear ozone scheme; and several other changes, including updates to parameterised microphysical processes
(Arduini
et al.
,
2019
; Kanehama
et al.
,
2022
; Lang
et al.
,
2023
)
.
•
Cycle 49r1
: Activation of the stochastically perturbed parameterisations (SPP) scheme for atmospheric model uncertainty; revisions to the ocean wave model, including an increase of horizontal resolution to match the native IFS atmosphere grid; and revisions to the land surface model, including a new urban canopy model
(Ollinaho
et al.
,
2017
; Leutbecher
et al.
,
2024
; Roberts
et al.
,
2024
)
.
•
Cycle 49r2
: Implementation of new ocean and sea ice configurations and associated (re)analyses based on version 4.0.6 of the Nucleus for European Modelling of the Ocean (NEMO) ocean model and the Sea Ice modelling Integrated Initiative (SI
3
) sea ice model
(Madec
et al.
,
2019
; Vancoppenolle
et al.
,
2023
; Keeley
et al.
,
2024
)
, which will become operational in IFS cycle 50r1
(Polichtchouk
et al.
,
2025a
)
.
The most relevant developments for this study are the changes to the ocean and sea ice models, which include revisions to the ocean turbulent mixing following
Storkey
et al.
(
2018
)
; activation of a nonlinear free surface and z-star vertical coordinate to provide local conservation of volume and tracers; and the introduction of a multi-category sea ice model, which includes prognostic salinity and a parameterised representation of surface melt-ponds
(Keeley
et al.
,
2024
)
. Other important changes include more consistent coupling of sea ice and snow depth information between the sea ice and atmosphere models; deactivation of partial coupling in the extratropics, ensuring full ocean-atmosphere coupling from the first time step; and the use of reduced-precision arithmetic across all model components–including ocean and sea ice–which improves computational efficiency without compromising accuracy
(e.g.  Lang
et al.
,
2021
)
.
These physical modelling updates are accompanied by new ocean and sea ice initial conditions from the 6th generation ECMWF ocean and sea ice ensemble reanalysis system
(ORAS6;  Zuo
et al.
,
2024
)
. In addition to adopting the revised physical models, ORAS6 introduces several other developments, including variational assimilation of SST observations, hourly surface forcing from ERA5
(Hersbach
et al.
,
2020
)
, and a larger ensemble of ten perturbed members and one control member. Together, these changes to data assimilation methods and model formulation yield important improvements over ORAS5
(Zuo
et al.
,
2019
)
, including a better representation of the diurnal cycle in SST, reduced near-surface biases in the Gulf Stream region, and substantially improved near-surface temperature and sea level variability throughout the extratropics
(Zuo
et al.
,
2024
)
.
The coupled reference ensemble reforecast used in this study (ENS-C) consists of 10 perturbed members, each integrated for 46-days, starting on the first of each month between 2006 and 2023 for a total of 216 start dates. The atmospheric model is configured to use the cubic octahedral reduced Gaussian grid with 137 vertical levels and a horizontal resolution of Tco319 (
Δ
\Delta
x
≈
\approx
35 km). The atmosphere is coupled hourly to an eddy-permitting NEMO4-SI
3
configuration, which uses 75 vertical levels in the ocean and the eORCA025 grid (
Δ
\Delta
x
≈
\approx
25 km). Atmospheric fields are initialised from the ERA5 reanalysis and ocean/sea-ice fields are initialised using the ORAS6 ensemble reanalysis. Ensemble spread in coupled forecasts is generated through a combination of atmosphere, ocean, and sea ice initial condition perturbations and stochastic parameterisations in the atmospheric model
(Leutbecher
et al.
,
2017
; Lock
et al.
,
2019
; Leutbecher
et al.
,
2024
; Zuo
et al.
,
2024
)
.
2.2
Uncoupled subseasonal ensemble reforecasts (ENS-U)
To evaluate the impact of ocean-atmosphere coupling, we run subseasonal ensemble reforecasts with ocean and sea ice boundary conditions derived from observed values at initialisation time (ENS-U). In these experiments, SSTs are specified using daily values from the Operational Sea Surface Temperature and Ice Analysis
(Donlon
et al.
,
2012
)
that are persisted as anomalies on top of a daily mean SST climatology (1979-2001) derived from the ERA40 reanalysis
(Uppala
et al.
,
2005
; Jung and Leutbecher,
2008
)
. Sea ice cover is specified using persistence of Ocean and Sea Ice Satellite Application Facility (OSI SAF) initial values for the first 15 days
(Eastwood
et al.
,
2014
)
, linear blending between persistence and the ERA40 climatology for days 16-45, and climatology thereafter. The difference between coupled and uncoupled surface boundary conditions for an example start date is illustrated in figure
1
. This approach follows the specification of SST and sea ice boundary conditions in ECMWF operational deterministic forecasts prior to the activation of ocean-atmosphere coupling on June 5th 2018
(Mogensen
et al.
,
2017
; Keeley and Mogensen,
2018
)
. This persistence-climatology approach represents a realistic operational alternative to a fully coupled ocean model, since observed SSTs beyond the initialisation date are not available in real-time forecast applications. Other than the specified ocean and sea ice boundary conditions, these reforecasts are configured identically to the ENS-C experiments.
2.3
Eddy-permitting subseasonal reforecasts (LRA-EPO and HRA-EPO)
In addition to the coupled and uncoupled ensemble reforecasts described above, we also present evidence from single-member reforecasts run with different ocean and atmosphere resolutions. Ensemble forecasts were not run for these configurations due to the combination of (i) their high computational cost and (ii) the absence of suitable ocean initial conditions to initialise an eddy-rich ensemble. The eddy-permitting reforecasts are based on IFS cycle 48r1 atmosphere run at Tco319 (
Δ
\Delta
x
≈
\approx
35 km) and Tco1279 (
Δ
\Delta
x
≈
\approx
9 km) combined with the eORCA025 NEMO4-SI
3
ocean and sea ice configurations (
Δ
\Delta
x
≈
\approx
25 km) described above. We refer to these configurations as
lower-resolution atmosphere eddy-permitting ocean
(LRA-EPO) and
higher-resolution atmosphere eddy-permitting ocean
(HRA-EPO), respectively. Each reforecast consists of a single unperturbed member run for 32 days starting on the first of each month between 1995 and 2016, for a total of 264 start dates. Atmospheric fields are initialised from the ERA5 reanalysis
(Hersbach
et al.
,
2020
)
and ocean/sea-ice initial conditions are derived from ERA5-forced NEMO4-SI
3
simulations that are tightly constrained to follow daily values from the GLORYS12v1 eddy-rich global ocean reanalysis
(Lellouche
et al.
,
2021
)
. Further details on the generation of ocean and sea ice initial conditions are provided in Appendix A.
Table 1:
Summary of subseasonal reforecast configurations used in this study.
Experiment
Atmosphere
Ocean/ice
Members
Length (days)
Period
Initial conditions
ENS-C
IFS 49r2 (
∼
35
{\sim}35
km)
NEMO4-SI
3
(
∼
25
{\sim}25
km)
10
46
2006–2023
ERA5/ORAS6
ENS-U
IFS 49r2 (
∼
35
{\sim}35
km)
Persistence/climatology
a
10
46
2006–2023
ERA5
LRA-EPO
IFS 48r1 (
∼
35
{\sim}35
km)
NEMO4-SI
3
(
∼
25
{\sim}25
km)
1
32
1995–2016
ERA5/GLORYS12v1
b
HRA-EPO
IFS 48r1 (
∼
9
{\sim}9
km)
NEMO4-SI
3
(
∼
25
{\sim}25
km)
1
32
1995–2016
ERA5/GLORYS12v1
b
LRA-ERO
IFS 48r1 (
∼
35
{\sim}35
km)
NEMO4-SI
3
(
∼
8
{\sim}8
km)
1
32
1995–2016
ERA5/GLORYS12v1
b
HRA-ERO
IFS 48r1 (
∼
9
{\sim}9
km)
NEMO4-SI
3
(
∼
8
{\sim}8
km)
1
32
1995–2016
ERA5/GLORYS12v1
b
a
SST and sea ice boundary conditions derived from observations using a combination of (anomaly) persistence and climatology.
b
Ocean and sea ice initial conditions derived from GLORYS12v1 as described in Appendix A.
2.4
Eddy-rich subseasonal reforecasts (LRA-ERO and HRA-ERO)
Eddy-rich subseasonal reforecasts are based on the IFS cycle 48r1 atmosphere run at Tco319 (
Δ
\Delta
x
≈
\approx
35 km) and Tco1279 (
Δ
\Delta
x
≈
\approx
9 km) combined with the eORCA12 NEMO4-SI
3
ocean and sea ice configurations (
Δ
\Delta
x
≈
\approx
8 km). We refer to these configurations as
lower-resolution atmosphere eddy-rich ocean
(LRA-ERO) and
higher-resolution atmosphere eddy-rich ocean
(HRA-ERO), respectively. Other than the increased ocean resolution, these configurations are identical to the LRA-EPO and HRA-EPO configurations described above, with ocean and sea ice initial conditions derived from GLORYS12v1 as described in Appendix A.
2.5
Atmospheric circulation indices
To complement our analysis of weekly mean gridded fields, we also evaluate the impact of ocean-atmosphere coupling on four daily mean indices that measure different aspects of the large-scale tropospheric and stratospheric circulation that are important at subseasonal timescales. Specifically, we consider the Madden-Julian oscillation (MJO), the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), the Pacific-North American pattern (PNA), and the Northern Hemisphere Stratospheric Polar Vortex (PVORTEX). A detailed description of the calculation of these indices from ERA5 and ECMWF reforecast data is provided by
Roberts and Vitart (
2026
)
, which we summarise below.
MJO predictability is evaluated using the daily mean real-time multivariate MJO (RMM) index following
Wheeler and Hendon (
2004
)
and
Gottschalck
et al.
(
2010
)
. The two components of the bivariate RMM index (RMM1 and RMM2) are used to define MJO amplitude and phase as
RMM1
2
+
RMM2
2
\sqrt{\textnormal{RMM1}^{2}+\textnormal{RMM2}^{2}}
and
arctan2
​
(
RMM2
,
RMM1
)
\textnormal{arctan2}(\textnormal{RMM2},\textnormal{RMM1})
, respectively. Phase numbers correspond to the different sectors of MJO phase diagram and are indicative of MJO activity over the Indian Ocean (phases 2 and 3), maritime continent (phases 4 and 5), western Pacific Ocean (phases 6 and 7), and the Atlantic Ocean/Africa (phases 8 and 1). NAO indices are derived by projecting 500 hPa geopotential height anomalies onto a loading pattern defined as the first empirical orthogonal function (EOF) for the region bounded by 20
∘
N-80
∘
N and 90
∘
W-40
∘
E. PNA indices are calculated the same way, but for the region 10
∘
N-80
∘
N and 150
∘
E-300
∘
E. The PVORTEX index is calculated as the normalized zonal mean of 50 hPa zonal wind anomalies at 60
∘
N.
2.6
Reanalysis and satellite data
Coupled and uncoupled ensemble forecasts are evaluated against the ERA5 reanalysis
(Hersbach
et al.
,
2020
)
on a reduced-resolution 2.5
∘
×
\times
2.5
∘
latitude-longitude grid, which reflects our focus on the predictability of the large-scale atmospheric circulation. Eddy-permitting (LRA-EPO and HRA-EPO) and eddy-rich (LRA-ERO and HRA-ERO) reforecasts are evaluated using a higher-resolution 0.5
∘
×
\times
0.5
∘
latitude-longitude grid against a combination of ERA5 for atmospheric fields and reprocessed satellite products for ocean and sea ice fields. During model integrations, all ocean and atmosphere fields are archived on the native atmospheric grid before interpolation to a common verification grid using either conservative (ocean and surface fields) or linear (atmosphere pressure levels) methods. For this reason, our evaluation of ocean and sea ice fields should be considered an evaluation of the fields as seen by the atmosphere, and is thus sometimes sensitive to the resolution of the intermediate atmospheric grid and choice of verification grid. We highlight these sensitivities in our results where relevant.
For the high-resolution evaluation of eddy-permitting and eddy-rich experiments, SSTs are compared with the satellite-based European Space Agency-Climate Change Initiative/Copernicus Climate Change Service (ESA-CCI/C3S) reprocessed product
(Merchant
et al.
,
2019
; Good
et al.
,
2020
)
. Sea ice cover is evaluated using OSI-430/OSI-450 data distributed alongside the ESA-CCI/C3S SSTs, which are originally provided by the Ocean and Sea Ice Satellite Application Facility
(OSI-SAF;  Lavergne
et al.
,
2019
)
. Sea surface heights are evaluated using the reprocessed analysis distributed by the Copernicus Marine Service, which is produced by the Data Unification and Altimeter Combination System (DUACS) multimission altimeter data processing system
(CMS,
2026
)
. For consistent comparison between models and satellite observations, we remove the global mean from both simulated and observed sea-surface height fields. We follow
Roberts
et al.
(
2016
)
and refer to this derived property as
dynamic sea level
, as it can be directly related to changes in ocean circulation and does not include contributions from global thermosteric sea-level rise or changes to the total mass of the ocean.
2.7
Verification methods
The impacts of coupling and changes in ocean resolution are assessed by separately evaluating the impact on the climatological mean state and forecast anomalies calculated following the ‘by-member–other-years’ method described in
Roberts and Leutbecher (
2025
)
. Impacts on the mean state are assessed by computing relative changes in the mean absolute bias (MAB) using a mean absolute bias score (MABS), defined as:
MABS
=
1
−
MAB
A
MAB
B
,
\mathrm{MABS}=1-\frac{\mathrm{MAB}_{\mathrm{A}}}{\mathrm{MAB}_{\mathrm{B}}},
(1)
where
MAB
=
∑
i
w
i
​
∑
m
|
⟨
F
⟩
i
,
m
−
⟨
O
⟩
i
,
m
|
∑
i
w
i
,
\mathrm{MAB}=\frac{\sum_{i}w_{i}\sum_{m}\left|\langle F\rangle_{i,m}-\langle O\rangle_{i,m}\right|}{\sum_{i}w_{i}},
(2)
and
⟨
F
⟩
i
,
m
\langle F\rangle_{i,m}
and
⟨
O
⟩
i
,
m
\langle O\rangle_{i,m}
represent climatologies for a specific lead time in forecasts and observations, respectively, as a function of grid-point
i
i
and the month of the forecast start date
m
m
, and
w
i
w_{i}
is a weight proportional to grid-cell area. A positive value of MABS indicates that absolute biases aggregated across all locations and start dates are reduced in experiment A compared to experiment B. The aggregation of absolute biases calculated separately for each month means that MABS is also sensitive to improvements in the amplitude of the seasonal cycle that occur without an associated change to the annual mean climatology.
The impacts on deterministic and probabilistic skill of anomaly forecasts are evaluated using anomaly correlations, root mean square error (RMSE), and the fair version of the continuous ranked probability score
(fCRPS;  Ferro
et al.
,
2008
; Ferro,
2014
; Leutbecher,
2019
)
. Skill scores are computed from area-weighted scores averaged over all forecast cases for a given lead time. The area-weighted regional fCRPS is calculated as
fCRPS
¯
region
=
∑
i
w
i
⋅
fCRPS
¯
i
∑
i
w
i
,
\overline{\mathrm{fCRPS}}_{\mathrm{region}}=\frac{\sum_{i}w_{i}\cdot\overline{\mathrm{fCRPS}}_{i}}{\sum_{i}w_{i}},
(3)
where the overbar denotes an average over all forecast cases for a given lead time. The associated skill score is given by
fCRPSS
region
=
1
−
fCRPS
¯
region
CRPS0
¯
region
,
\mathrm{fCRPSS}_{\mathrm{region}}=1-\frac{\overline{\mathrm{fCRPS}}_{\mathrm{region}}}{\overline{\mathrm{CRPS0}}_{\mathrm{region}}},
(4)
where
CRPS0
¯
region
\overline{\mathrm{CRPS0}}_{\mathrm{region}}
represents the unadjusted CRPS of reference forecasts constructed from the climatological distribution of observed anomalies (excluding the forecast start date), averaged in the same manner. For deterministic forecasts, we also calculate area-weighted RMSE as
RMSE
region
=
∑
i
w
i
⋅
MSE
i
∑
i
w
i
,
\mathrm{RMSE}_{\mathrm{region}}=\sqrt{\frac{\sum_{i}w_{i}\cdot\mathrm{MSE}_{i}}{\sum_{i}w_{i}}},
(5)
where MSE
i
is the mean squared error for a specific location and lead time. Sampling uncertainty is evaluated using a bootstrap resampling approach where scores (and associated differences) are calculated 500 times using randomly selected (with replacement) start dates as described in
Roberts
et al.
(
2022
)
. Score differences are deemed statistically robust if the 2.5
th
and 97.5
th
percentiles of the bootstrap distribution have the same sign.
3
Impacts of ocean-atmosphere coupling in ECMWF S2S forecasts
3.1
Impacts on the mean state
To begin, we summarise the impacts of ocean-atmosphere coupling on the mean state of ECMWF subseasonal forecasts for a range of parameters, regions, and lead times (figure
2
). In these experiments, ocean-atmosphere coupling has a small but negative impact on the climatological mean state of SSTs as diagnosed from the statistically robust differences in MABS for SST across all lead times in the tropics and southern hemisphere. However, these large relative changes correspond to rather small differences in absolute terms. For example, the week 1 mean absolute bias of SST over the tropics increases from 0.08 K in ENS-U to 0.10 K in ENS-C. In contrast, coupling improves the climatological mean sea ice cover, which likely reflects deficiencies in the crude persistence-climatology approximation in ENS-U compared to the combination of coupled forecasts and high quality sea ice analysis initial conditions in ENS-C.
In general, the tropical atmosphere mean state is more sensitive to ocean-atmosphere coupling than the extratropical atmospheric mean state. However, we identify several atmospheric fields where the climatological mean is slightly degraded during the first few weeks of ENS-C forecasts, including outgoing longwave radiation, two-metre temperature, and 200 hPa streamfunctions in the extratropics. There is also some evidence for very small relative degradations to climatological 50 hPa temperatures in the tropics. Nevertheless, the small degradations to SSTs in the tropics and southern hemisphere do not generally correspond to negative impacts on the atmospheric mean state. On the contrary, the mean state of the tropical atmosphere is generally improved across a wide range of parameters and lead times (figure
2
), which is indicative of a non-linear rectified impact of ocean-atmosphere coupling on the atmospheric mean state mediated by improved air-sea interactions and coupled ocean-atmosphere variability. This interpretation is supported by our evaluation of weekly forecast anomalies in the following section.
3.2
Impacts on weekly mean forecast anomalies
Ocean-atmosphere coupling has unequivocally positive impacts on weekly mean SST and sea ice anomaly forecasts across all subseasonal lead times (figure
3
). These large improvements in ENS-C mostly reflect the crude persistence-climatology approximation used in ENS-U, which diverges from the true ocean state at extended lead times. Coupling also improves anomaly-based forecast skill for all evaluated fields in the tropical atmosphere, which reflects the strong coupling between SST anomalies, turbulent air-sea fluxes, atmospheric convection, and the large-scale circulation in the tropical troposphere
(DeMott
et al.
,
2015
)
. These positive impacts on forecast skill are most pronounced in the troposphere, where they grow with lead time, but more limited in the stratosphere (figure
3
).
Despite the substantial improvements to SST and sea ice anomaly forecasts in both hemispheres, ocean-atmosphere coupling has a limited impact on weekly mean extratropical atmospheric variability in these experiments (figure
3
). Two-metre temperature (T
2m
) is a notable exception and is significantly improved at lead times of two to six weeks, which likely reflects a direct response to the improved SST anomalies in ENS-C compared to ENS-U for the same lead times. In contrast, week one extratropical T
2m
anomaly forecasts are slightly degraded in ENS-C relative to ENS-U, which is a consequence of increased week one biases and reduced anomaly skill concentrated over the Arctic sea ice. In coupled configurations, thermodynamic flux calculations take into account sea ice and snow thickness information from the dynamic SI
3
model, whereas both ENS-U and the ERA5 reference assume a constant and uniform ice thickness of 1.5 m. This results in systematically cooler T
2m
over the Arctic in ENS-C compared to both ENS-U and ERA5. Since ERA5 and ENS-U share the same systematic errors in T
2m
over sea ice
(e.g. Zampieri
et al.
,
2023
)
, the apparent degradation of week one T
2m
in ENS-C is partly an artefact of verification against ERA5.
Other extratropical atmospheric anomaly fields that exhibit notable improvements in ENS-C relative to ENS-U include streamfunction and velocity potential at 200 hPa (figure
3
). Given the absence of similar improvements for lower-level tropospheric fields in the extratropics, we speculate that these signals represent an extratropical response to improved forcing from the tropics. However, it is not clear why these impacts are not also evident in 200 hPa zonal and meridional wind fields. One possibility is that compensating changes in the divergent and rotational components of the flow obscure improvements when expressed in terms of total winds, but remain detectable in a streamfunction-velocity potential decomposition. Alternatively, the weaker signals in zonal and meridional winds may reflect greater sensitivity to small-scale variability and sampling uncertainties, which are less prominent in the smoother streamfunction and velocity potential representations.
We also see some evidence for improvements to extratropical skill for a range of tropospheric parameters at week four in the northern hemisphere (figure
3
). However, given that comparisons for different parameters are not independent and we do not see similar improvements in weeks three or five, these apparent improvements may be a consequence of sampling uncertainty. Further investigation with a larger sample of start dates may be required for a more robust evaluation of the extratropical atmospheric response to ocean-atmosphere coupling at subseasonal timescales.
To provide a more regional evaluation of the impacts of ocean-atmosphere coupling, figure
4
shows changes in fCRPSS for 200 hPa temperature anomalies (T200) at lead times of one and six weeks. For a lead time of one week, regional T200 skill is extremely similar in ENS-U and ENS-C (figure
4
a,b). In both reforecast configurations, week one skill is generally higher in the extratropics than the tropics and significantly better than climatology for 100 % of plotted locations. Nevertheless, there are some locations, such as the maritime continent, where ocean-atmosphere coupling has a statistically robust and positive impact on week one T200 forecasts (figure
4
e). The impact of ocean-atmosphere coupling on T200 anomalies is much clearer at subseasonal lead times (figure
4
c,d). The regional patterns of week six forecast skill are similar in both reforecast configurations, such that fCRPSS is generally higher in the tropics than the mid-latitudes. However, ocean-atmosphere coupling has a clear positive impact on T200 skill in the tropics such that 99 % of locations exceed climatological forecast skill in ENS-C compared to only 88% of locations in ENS-U. The positive impacts of ocean-atmosphere coupling are generally restricted to within
±
\pm
45
∘
latitude of the equator, with the largest impacts above the tropical warm pool in the western Pacific Ocean (figure
4
f). The main features of these results are consistent when the analysis is restricted to extended boreal winter (November–April) or extended boreal summer (May–October) start dates (not shown).
3.3
Impacts on the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO)
This section evaluates the impact of ocean-atmosphere coupling on the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO), which is the leading mode of intraseasonal variability in the tropics and an important source of predictability at subseasonal lead times
(Madden and Julian,
1971
; Vitart,
2017
)
. The MJO is characterised by eastward propagating precipitation and circulation anomalies, which evolve with a characteristic timescale of 30-60 days. Figure
5
shows composite means of precipitation anomalies for each MJO phase in ERA5, ENS-C, and ENS-U. In general, both reforecasts exhibit realistic MJO propagation as diagnosed from composite average precipitation anomalies such that it is difficult to identify a clear impact of ocean-atmosphere coupling. In addition, it is difficult to discriminate between coupled and uncoupled reforecast configurations when examining the evolution of specific MJO events in RMM phase space (figure
6
). For example, the ensemble mean and member RMM trajectories from ENS-C and ENS-U forecasts initialised on October 1st 2010 are extremely similar (figure
6
). In this specific example, the RMM amplitudes are slightly higher and closer to ERA5 estimates in the uncoupled ENS-U configuration.
Nevertheless, when MJO forecast skill is assessed over all cases, we find a strong positive impact of ocean-atmosphere coupling that emerges at lead times longer than seven days (figure
7
). In particular, the lead time at which ensemble mean correlations reach a threshold value of 0.6 increases from 21 days in ENS-U to 26 days in ENS-C. This positive impact is also evident in probabilistic metrics of MJO forecast skill (not shown), such that MJO predictions from ENS-C are significantly better than ENS-U at all lead times beyond day seven. In these simulations, the improvements in MJO skill associated with the activation of ocean-atmosphere coupling correspond to faster propagation and a reduced phase bias. These positive impacts of ocean-atmosphere coupling on RMM predictability are more pronounced during the extended boreal winter (November–April), but also evident during boreal summer (May–October) start dates. Overall, these results are consistent with previous work and the interpretation of the MJO as a predominantly atmospheric mode, but with an important role for air-sea interactions and coupling between the ocean mixed layer, atmospheric convection, and moisture advection
(Woolnough
et al.
,
2007
; Kim
et al.
,
2010
; Klingaman and Woolnough,
2014
; DeMott
et al.
,
2015
)
.
3.4
Impacts on extratropical modes of atmospheric variability
Figure
8
shows the impact of ocean-atmosphere coupling on three indices of large-scale atmospheric circulation in the extratropical northern hemisphere. Despite the dramatic improvements to SST and sea ice predictions in the extratropics, the subseasonal forecast skill for NAO, PNA, and PVORTEX indices is extremely similar in ENS-C and ENS-U reforecast configurations. More specifically, ENS-C and ENS-U estimates of fCRPSS are consistent within our estimated 95% confidence intervals for almost all lead times for all three circulation indices. In addition, both coupled and uncoupled reforecast configurations provide a consistent picture of the relative predictability of these indices, such that PVORTEX
>
>
PNA
>
>
NAO. These results are qualitatively unchanged for other metrics of forecast skill, such as correlations (not shown), and are not sensitive to whether the analysis is restricted to extended boreal winter (November–April) or extended boreal summer (May–October) start dates. This analysis of daily mean indices is consistent with the limited impact of ocean-atmosphere coupling on extratropical weekly mean anomalies shown in figure
3
.
4
Impacts of an eddy-rich ocean
4.1
Eddy-rich initial conditions
In this section, we combine results from the eddy-permitting (LRA-EPO, HRA-EPO) and eddy-resolving (LRA-ERO, HRA-ERO) reforecast configurations described in table
1
to evaluate the impact of increasing ocean resolution on subseasonal predictability. To begin, we confirm that our ocean initialisation procedure (see Appendix A) is behaving as expected such that ocean mesoscale features are represented coherently across eddy-rich and eddy-permitting reforecast initial conditions (figure
9
). Despite some differences in the shape and intensity of individual eddies, all reforecast configurations capture the main features of the Gulf Stream SST front and its extension at initialisation time, including the location of meanders and sharp horizontal gradients.
Furthermore, this comparison highlights that the effective ocean boundary conditions experienced by the atmosphere can be more sensitive to the horizontal resolution of the atmosphere than the ocean. This is evident from the strong similarity of configurations that share the same atmospheric resolution but differ in ocean resolution (e.g. figure
9
a vs
9
b and
9
c vs
9
d). In contrast, the higher-resolution ocean state appears substantially smoother when sampled by a lower-resolution atmosphere (figure
9
c) and closely resembles the lower-resolution initial ocean state grid viewed at the same atmospheric resolution (figure
9
d).
4.2
Impacts on the mean state
Figures
10
and
11
summarise the impact of increasing ocean resolution from the eddy-permitting to eddy-rich regime in single-member subseasonal reforecasts for different variables, lead times, and regions. The impact on the climatological mean state is consistent across both atmospheric resolutions, with small but statistically robust improvements to SST, sea ice cover, and dynamic sea level in the extratropical northern hemisphere and small improvements to mean sea level in the tropics. Otherwise, we find very limited evidence for statistically robust changes in the atmospheric mean state in response to increased ocean resolution in these single-member experiments (figures
10
and
11
). We find similar results for the extratropical atmosphere in the southern hemisphere, albeit with some evidence for degradations to climatological T
2m
associated with increased sea ice cover biases in our eddy-rich ocean configurations (not shown).
The regional details and large-scale structure of SST biases are extremely similar for all four combinations of ocean and atmosphere resolution (figure
12
a-d). For example, week 4
1
2
\frac{1}{2}
forecasts (i.e. days 26 to 32) initialised on January 1st all exhibit comparable positive SST biases associated with the Gulf Stream, East Greenland Current, tropical oceans, and the Southern Ocean south of 50
∘
S. There is also strong agreement on the location of negative SST biases, particularly in the mid-latitudes oceans of the Southern Hemisphere. Nevertheless, we find some evidence of improvements to regional SST biases in our eddy-rich reforecast configurations, including a widespread cooling of 0.2-0.5 K in the Southern Ocean and a slight reduction to the magnitude of SST biases in the Gulf Stream region for January 1st start dates (figure
12
e,f). Nevertheless, these differences are modest compared to the overall bias magnitudes that remain comparable across all configurations.
4.3
Impacts on weekly mean forecast anomalies
The impacts of ocean resolution on weekly mean anomaly forecast skill diagnosed using differences in anomaly-based RMSE are also summarised in figures
10
and
11
. In general, we find that the weekly mean RMSE of atmospheric fields is extremely similar in eddy-rich and eddy-permitting reforecast configurations. It is possible to identify some combinations of region, lead time, and atmospheric resolution where increased ocean resolution is associated with seemingly significant reductions in RMSE (e.g. 50 hPa temperature in the Northern Hemisphere for days 26-32 in LRA-ERO relative to LRA-EPO). However, when balancing the evidence across different atmospheric resolutions, variables, and lead times, we do not find strong evidence that these eddy-rich ocean configurations provide substantial or statistically robust improvements to atmospheric forecast skill at subseasonal lead times (figures
10
and
11
). Nevertheless, it remains possible that modest improvements, not detectable in these single-member experiments, could emerge with ensemble reforecasts and/or a larger sample of start dates.
In contrast, the impact of increased ocean resolution on the RMSE of weekly mean ocean and sea ice anomalies seems to be sensitive to the horizontal resolution of the atmosphere model (figures
10
and
11
). For example, when coupled to the lower-resolution Tco319 atmosphere, the eddy-rich ocean configuration has an either slightly positive or neutral impact on weekly mean SST, sea ice cover, and sea level anomalies in the tropics and extratropical Northern Hemisphere (figure
10
). In contrast, the eddy-rich ocean configuration seems to significantly increase the RMSE of the same fields when coupled to the higher-resolution Tco1279 atmosphere (figure
11
). The absolute magnitudes of the SST RMSE differences are very small, and comparable to (or less than) the median per-pixel uncertainty of 0.18 K that is estimated for the ESA-CCI SST product
(Merchant
et al.
,
2019
)
. Nevertheless, given these signals are the main detectable impact of the increased ocean resolution, we will try to understand their origins.
There are two possible explanations for this sensitivity to atmospheric resolution: (1) A physical interpretation, in which the relative performance of eddy-rich and eddy-permitting NEMO4-SI
3
configurations is sensitive to the details of the atmospheric representation. (2) A statistical interpretation, in which our assessment of RMSE changes in single-member deterministic forecasts is compromised by the so-called double penalty effect
(Lledó
et al.
,
2023
)
. For deterministic metrics such as RMSE, forecasts that predict small-scale features with sharp gradients (e.g. convective precipitation cells or ocean eddies) are penalised twice when the simulated feature does not match the corresponding feature in the verification dataset: once for missing the feature in the correct location at the correct time, and again for having a similar feature elsewhere. In contrast, a smoother and less realistic forecast will only be penalised once for missing the observed feature. This effect is compounded by our evaluation of ocean fields archived on an intermediate IFS grid, which influences the effective resolution of the ocean features seen by the atmosphere (figure
9
).
A simple way to investigate the potential influence of double-penalty effects is to evaluate the scale-sensitivity of RMSE estimates using averages over different domain sizes. Figure
13
shows RMSE differences for week 1
1
2
\frac{1}{2}
SST anomalies after conservative interpolation of all data to either a 0.5
∘
×
\times
0.5
∘
or 2.5
∘
×
\times
2.5
∘
latitude-longitude grid. The use of conservative interpolation, which can be considered a weighted average of contributing locations, means that RMSE calculated on the coarser grid is less sensitive to the exact position of individual ocean eddies and more representative of errors in the large scale ocean state. A more robust way to evaluate these small differences would be to perform ensemble simulations and apply probabilistic evaluation metrics (e.g. fCRPS) in observation space, which would simultaneously suppress the influence of double-penalty effects and limit the influence of interpolation artefacts.
When evaluated on a 0.5
∘
×
\times
0.5
∘
grid, the RMSE difference maps shown in figures
13
a and
13
b are consistent with the summary score cards shown in figures
10
and
11
. RMSE differences evaluated using the lower resolution atmosphere (LRA-ERO minus LRA-EPO) give a more positive impression of the impacts from an eddy-rich ocean, with 12% of comparisons indicating a significant reduction of RMSE and 6% of comparisons indicating a significant increase in RMSE. In contrast, RMSE differences evaluated using the higher-resolution atmosphere (HRA-ERO minus HRA-EPO) provide a more negative impression, with 6% of comparisons indicating a significant reduction of RMSE and 13% of comparisons indicating a significant increase in RMSE. However, RMSE differences estimated on the coarser 2.5
∘
×
\times
2.5
∘
grid provide a more consistent impression of the change in RMSE associated with increased ocean resolution (7-8% of comparisons indicating a significant reduction of RMSE and 12-14% of comparisons indicating a significant increase in RMSE). In this example, we find that the RMSE of week 1
1
2
\frac{1}{2}
SST anomalies is generally reduced along the Antarctic polar front and slightly increased in the Equatorial Indian Ocean, tropical Pacific Ocean, and the Gulf Stream region. Based on this analysis, the increased RMSE in the low-latitude regions seems to be a consequence of increases in the large-scale SST variance in the eddy-rich ocean configurations (not shown). Nevertheless, the resulting changes in RMSE are extremely small and may not be robust when evaluated using a different SST verification dataset.
5
Discussion and conclusions
The oceans are the principal reservoir of heat in the climate system and interact with the atmosphere through exchanges of energy, moisture, and momentum that influence variability and predictability across all temporal and spatial scales. At longer timescales, the benefits of ocean-atmosphere coupling for initialised predictions and climate projections are well established. For example, seasonal-to-decadal forecast systems rely on the accurate representation of coupled ocean-atmosphere dynamics to capture predictable signals such as ENSO and its global teleconnections
(Griffies and Bryan,
1997
; Stockdale
et al.
,
1998
)
. At shorter lead times, many studies have also highlighted the importance of air-sea coupling for the prediction of tropical atmospheric phenomena at timescales of days to weeks
(Bender
et al.
,
2007
; Woolnough
et al.
,
2007
; Seo
et al.
,
2009
; Shelly
et al.
,
2014
; Brassington
et al.
,
2015
; Mogensen
et al.
,
2017
)
. However, the benefits of ocean-atmosphere coupling for the extratropical atmosphere at medium-range and subseasonal lead times are more equivocal and likely sensitive to the relative balance between improvements associated with more realistic air-sea interactions and degradations arising from the development of biases at the coupling interface
(Roberts
et al.
,
2021
)
. Here, we provide a systematic assessment of the role of ocean-atmosphere coupling on subseasonal predictability, including an exploration of the potential for additional improvements through increased horizontal resolution and a better representation of the ocean mesoscale.
We find the largest benefits of ocean-atmosphere coupling for subseasonal atmospheric predictability in the tropical troposphere, where robust and widespread improvements are evident from week one and become systematically stronger with increased forecast lead time (figures
2
-
4
). Tropical forecast improvements are also evident in the increased skill of MJO predictions (figure
7
), such that ensemble mean bivariate RMM correlations decay to a threshold value of 0.6 at day 26 in ten-member coupled reforecasts (ENS-C) compared to day 21 in ten-member uncoupled reforecasts (ENS-U). These results are generally consistent with previous studies and reflect the strong coupling between SST anomalies, turbulent air-sea fluxes, deep atmospheric convection, and the large-scale circulation in the tropics
(Woolnough
et al.
,
2007
; Kim
et al.
,
2010
; Klingaman and Woolnough,
2014
; DeMott
et al.
,
2015
)
.
Despite the substantial improvements to extratropical SST and sea ice anomaly forecasts in ENS-C compared to ENS-U, we find that ocean-atmosphere coupling has a more limited impact on weekly mean extratropical atmospheric variability at subseasonal lead times (figures
2
-
4
). For example, the subseasonal forecast skill of daily mean NAO, PNA, and PVORTEX indices is consistent in ENS-C and ENS-U within our estimated 95% confidence intervals for almost all lead times for all three circulation indices (figure
8
). Notable exceptions include weekly mean forecasts of 200 hPa velocity potential and 200 hPa streamfunction anomalies, which are significantly improved with ocean-atmosphere coupling. Given the absence of similar improvements for lower-level tropospheric fields in the extratropics, we speculate that these signals represent an extratropical response to improved forcing from the tropics, though it is not clear why similar improvements are not also evident in 200 hPa zonal and meridional wind fields.
At climate timescales, an accurate representation of ocean eddies is crucial for a realistic simulation of ocean mass, heat, and salt transports and associated air-sea interactions and atmospheric feedbacks
(Griffies
et al.
,
2015
; Hewitt
et al.
,
2017
; Hirschi
et al.
,
2020
)
. However, at daily to weekly timescales, many of the known deficiencies of eddy-permitting models can be mitigated by accurate ocean initialisation
(e.g.  Roberts
et al.
,
2022
)
. Furthermore, depending on the details of the coupled model configuration, the effective SST resolution seen by the atmosphere may be more sensitive to the horizontal resolution of the atmosphere than the ocean (figure
9
).
Here, we show that increasing ocean resolution from the eddy-permitting to eddy-rich regime in single-member subseasonal reforecasts results in small but statistically robust improvements to the climatological mean state of some ocean and sea ice fields, which are consistent across different atmospheric resolutions (figures
10
and
11
). We also find some evidence for very small changes in the predictability of weekly mean ocean and sea ice anomalies (figures
10
and
11
). However, the qualitative and quantitative details of these changes in deterministic skill are sensitive to atmospheric configuration and the choice of verification grid (figure
13
).
In contrast, we do not find strong evidence that coupling to an eddy-rich ocean substantially improves weekly mean atmospheric forecast skill in single-member subseasonal reforecasts coupled to either Tco319 (
Δ
\Delta
x
≈
\approx
35 km) or Tco1279 (
Δ
\Delta
x
≈
\approx
9 km) configurations of the IFS atmosphere (figures
10
and
11
). The differences in RMSE are generally small and not statistically significant across multiple variables and atmospheric resolutions. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out that more subtle improvements, below the detection threshold of these single-member experiments, could be identified with ensemble reforecasts and/or a larger sample of start dates. However, given our results in section
3
, it is perhaps not surprising that small changes to extratropical SSTs associated with increased horizontal ocean resolution do not translate to substantial signals in the large-scale atmospheric circulation at subseasonal timescales. The main caveat to this conclusion is that it remains possible that biases in the representation of parameterised boundary layer processes or other aspects of the ocean-atmosphere coupling in the IFS coupled model could limit the sensitivity of our forecasts to the presence of mesoscale SST anomalies
(Maloney and Chelton,
2006
)
.
These results are generally consistent with other studies that have found a limited atmospheric response to an improved representation of the ocean mesoscale at daily to weekly lead times
(Roberts
et al.
,
2022
; Polichtchouk
et al.
,
2025b
; Reynolds
et al.
,
2025
)
. Nevertheless, other factors that have not been considered in this study may be important when considering the case for an eddy-rich ocean in a coupled forecast system. Such factors include the potential for more accurate regional and/or coastal ocean and sea ice forecast products, indirect impacts on forecast quality through improved initial conditions achieved with higher-resolution (coupled) data assimilation systems, and impacts on extreme events that are not captured in our deterministic evaluation of large-scale atmospheric circulation.
Acknowledgements
The reforecast datasets used in this study are publicly available from the ECMWF data catalogue. Table
B1
provides experiment identifiers and links to the relevant datasets. Data from the ERA5 reanalysis are available from
https://www.ecmwf.int/en/forecasts/dataset/ecmwf-reanalysis-v5
. The GLORYS12v1 reanalysis is available from the Copernicus Marine Service at
https://doi.org/10.48670/moi-00021
. CP was supported by the European Union’s Destination Earth Initiative and relates to tasks entrusted by the European Union to the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts implementing part of this initiative with funding by the European Union.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
\appendixpage
Appendix A
Ocean and sea ice initial conditions derived from GLORYS12v1
Ocean and sea ice initial conditions for the eddy-permitting ocean (EPO) and eddy-rich ocean (ERO) configurations described in section
2
are derived from forced NEMO4-SI
3
simulations that are tightly constrained to the eddy-rich GLORYS12v1 reanalysis
(Lellouche
et al.
,
2021
)
. This is an updated version of the method described by
Roberts
et al.
(
2022
)
and
Pelletier
et al.
(
2023
)
, which is employed to obtain ocean and sea ice initial conditions that are consistent across different horizontal resolutions. For both EPO and ERO configurations, we run ocean/sea-ice simulations with surface boundary conditions constrained by hourly data from ERA5
(Hersbach
et al.
,
2020
)
. In addition, 3D ocean temperature, 3D ocean salinity, sea ice concentration, and sea ice thickness, are relaxed towards daily mean data from the GLORYS12v1 reanalysis using a simple Newtonian scheme. Ocean temperature and salinity are constrained throughout the full vertical water column with a 5-day relaxation timescale. Sea ice concentration and thickness are relaxed with a 10-day relaxation timescale, with increments distributed from the GLORYS12v1 grid-box average across five SI3 sea ice thickness categories using a Gamma function. For the EPO experiments, GLORYS12v1 data are remapped conservatively to the lower-resolution eORCA025 model grid. The ERO experiments have a comparable horizontal resolution to the original GLORYS12v1 data and interpolation between grids is based on a bilinear approach. For both ERO and EPO configurations, we linearly interpolate between the 50 vertical levels of GLORYS12v1 and the 75 vertical levels used by the NEMO4-SI3 configurations described in this study. The restart files from these pseudo-analyses are then used to provide ocean and sea ice initial conditions for coupled experiments that are tightly constrained to the GLORYS12v1 reanalysis and consistent across eddy-permitting and eddy-rich resolutions.
Appendix B
Data accessibility
Table B1:
Data accessibility for reforecast experiments used in this study.
Experiment
ECMWF ID
URL
DOI
ENS-C
impq
https://apps.ecmwf.int/ifs-experiments/rd/impq/
10.21957/2c00-rw28
ENS-U
imq1
https://apps.ecmwf.int/ifs-experiments/rd/imq1/
10.21957/4z2b-e329
LRA-EPO
i7au
https://apps.ecmwf.int/ifs-experiments/rd/i7au/
10.21957/3qas-ev05
HRA-EPO
ii61
https://apps.ecmwf.int/ifs-experiments/rd/ii61/
10.21957/h2x3-j680
LRA-ERO
i7u3
https://apps.ecmwf.int/ifs-experiments/rd/i7u3/
10.21957/7sqw-n588
HRA-ERO
1162
https://apps.ecmwf.int/ifs-experiments/rd/ii62/
10.21957/bfqb-3521
Figure 1:
(a) Example of sea surface temperatures (SSTs) vs lead time in coupled (ENS-C) and uncoupled (ENS-U) ensemble forecasts initialised on January 1st 2023. Each member in ENS-C is initialised with a different member from the ORAS6 ensemble reanalysis
(Zuo
et al.
,
2024
)
, whereas SST boundary conditions for ENS-U are shared across all members. (b) As for SSTs, but for sea ice cover.
Figure 2:
A score card summarizing the impact of ocean-atmosphere coupling on weekly mean climatologies for different lead times and the following regions: NHEM (30
∘
N-90
∘
N), TROPICS (30
∘
S-30
∘
N), and SHEM (30
∘
S-90
∘
S). Blue triangles indicate positive values of MABS (equation
1
), which correspond to improvements in ENS-C compared to ENS-U relative to the ERA5 reference data. Red triangles indicate negative values of MABS, which corresponds to degradations in ENS-C compared to ENS-U. Symbol areas are proportional to the magnitude of MABS and darker triangles indicate that bootstrap-derived 95% confidence intervals do not intersect zero. The area of the grey reference triangle corresponds to
MABS
=
0.05
\mathrm{MABS}=0.05
.
Figure 3:
As figure
2
, but for differences in fCRPSS calculated using weekly mean anomalies. Blue triangles indicate positive values of
Δ
\Delta
fCRPSS, which correspond to improved anomaly-based forecast skill in ENS-C compared to ENS-U. Red triangles indicate negative values of
Δ
\Delta
fCRPSS, which corresponds to degradations in anomaly-based forecast skill in ENS-C compared to ENS-U. Symbol areas are proportional to the magnitude of
Δ
\Delta
fCRPSS and darker triangles indicate that bootstrap-derived 95% confidence intervals do not intersect zero. The area of the grey reference triangle corresponds to
Δ
​
fCRPSS
=
0.01
\Delta\mathrm{fCRPSS}=0.01
.
Figure 4:
(a, b) fCRPSS of week one temperature anomalies at 200 hPa in uncoupled (ENS-U) and coupled (ENS-C) subseasonal reforecasts. (c, d) As above, but for week six. (e, f) Differences in fCRPSS for weekly mean temperature anomalies at 200 hPa expressed as ENS-C minus ENS-U, such that positive values correspond to improvements associated with ocean-atmosphere coupling. Hatching/stippling indicates regions where estimated values are different from zero and robust to our estimates of sampling uncertainty such that the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of empirical bootstrap distributions have the same sign.
Figure 5:
Composite means of precipitation anomalies for each MJO phase for the period 2006-2023. Contributing data are selected using the MJO phase calculated separately in each forecast member and MJO events with amplitude less than one are excluded from the composite calculation. All forecast lead times are considered together and ERA5 data are subsampled to exactly match the available forecast data.
Figure 6:
A phase diagram showing the evolution of the MJO in ERA5 (black), ENS-C (red), and ENS-U (blue) for ensemble forecasts initialised on October 1st 2010. Ensemble mean and ERA5 trajectories are shown as thicker lines with solid circles marking each day of the forecast. Individual ensemble members are shown as thinner lines.
Figure 7:
Bivariate correlations for the RMM index in ENS-C (blue) and ENS-U (red) verified against indices calculated using ERA5. Error bars represent the 2.5 and 97.5th percentiles of an empirical distribution created by bootstrap resampling of the available start dates.
Figure 8:
Fair CRPSS of the daily mean extratropical atmospheric circulation indices described in section
2
in ENS-U (red) and ENS-C (blue). Error bars represent the 2.5 and 97.5th percentiles of an empirical distribution created by bootstrap resampling of the available start dates.
Figure 9:
SST initial conditions as seen by the IFS atmosphere in the Gulf Stream region for January 1st 2016 in the eddy-permitting and eddy-rich reforecast configurations described in table
1
. SST values are plotted as a Delaunay triangulation of the native IFS grid such that colours represent the mean of the three IFS grid points that define the triangle. The resulting plot is then shaded using meridional velocity data to give a three dimensional effect and highlight Gulf Stream meanders and eddies.
Figure 10:
Score cards summarising the subseasonal impact of increasing ocean horizontal resolution from
∼
\sim
25 km to
∼
\sim
8 km while coupled to the IFS Tco319 atmosphere, where blue triangles indicate increased MABS or reduced RMSE in LRA-ERO relative to LRA-EPO. RMSE differences are scaled such that
Δ
​
RMSE
=
RMSE
ERO
−
RMSE
EPO
RMSE
EPO
\Delta\mathrm{RMSE}=\frac{\mathrm{RMSE}_{\mathrm{ERO}}-\mathrm{RMSE}_{\mathrm{EPO}}}{\mathrm{RMSE}_{\mathrm{EPO}}}
. Score differences are calculated for the following regions: NHEM (30
∘
N-90
∘
N) and TROPICS (30
∘
S-30
∘
N). Symbol areas are proportional to the magnitude of changes and absolute values can be inferred by comparison with the area of the grey reference triangles. Darker colours indicate that bootstrap-derived 95% confidence intervals do not intersect zero.
Figure 11:
As figure
10
, but for reforecasts using the IFS Tco1279 atmosphere. Blue triangles indicate increased MABS or reduced RMSE in HRA-ERO relative to HRA-EPO.
Figure 12:
(a-d) Week 4
1
2
\frac{1}{2}
(i.e. days 26-32) SST biases in eddy-permitting and eddy-rich reforecasts initialised on January 1st 1995-2016 relative to ESA-CCI SST
(Merchant
et al.
,
2019
)
. (e,f) Difference between January 1st SST climatologies in eddy-rich and eddy-permitting reforecast configurations. Hatching/stippling indicates regions where estimated values are different from zero and robust to our estimates of sampling uncertainty such that the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of empirical bootstrap distributions have the same sign.
Figure 13:
(a,b) RMSE differences for week 1
1
2
\frac{1}{2}
(i.e. days 5-11) SST anomalies estimated after conservative interpolation of all data to a common 0.5
∘
×
\times
0.5
∘
latitude-longitude grid. (c,d) As above, but after conservative interpolation of all data to a common 2.5
∘
×
\times
2.5
∘
latitude-longitude grid. Negative values (blue shading) correspond to reduced RMSE in eddy-rich ocean configurations. Hatching/stippling indicates regions where estimated values are different from zero and robust to our estimates of sampling uncertainty such that the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of empirical bootstrap distributions have the same sign.
References
M. A. Alexander, I. Bladé, M. Newman, J. R. Lanzante, N. Lau, and J. D. Scott (2002)
The atmospheric bridge: the influence of ENSO teleconnections on air–sea interaction over the global oceans
.
Journal of climate
15
(
16
),
pp. 2205–2231
.
Cited by:
§1
.
G. Arduini, G. Balsamo, E. Dutra, J. J. Day, I. Sandu, S. Boussetta, and T. Haiden (2019)
Impact of a multi-layer snow scheme on near-surface weather forecasts
.
Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems
11
(
12
),
pp. 4687–4710
.
Cited by:
1st item
.
M. A. Balmaseda, C. DeMott, C. A. Reynolds, C. D. Roberts, and A. Subramanian (2026)
The role of the ocean in subseasonal-to-seasonal predictability and prediction
.
In
Sub-seasonal to Seasonal Prediction
,
pp. 271–320
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§1
.
M. A. Bender, I. Ginis, R. Tuleya, B. Thomas, and T. Marchok (2007)
The operational GFDL coupled hurricane–ocean prediction system and a summary of its performance
.
Monthly Weather Review
135
(
12
),
pp. 3965–3989
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§5
.
G. Brassington, M. Martin, H. Tolman, S. Akella, M. Balmeseda, C. Chambers, E. Chassignet, J. Cummings, Y. Drillet, P. Jansen,
et al.
(2015)
Progress and challenges in short-to medium-range coupled prediction
.
Journal of Operational Oceanography
8
(
sup2
),
pp. s239–s258
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§5
.
F. O. Bryan, R. Tomas, J. M. Dennis, D. B. Chelton, N. G. Loeb, and J. L. McClean (2010)
Frontal scale air–sea interaction in high-resolution coupled climate models
.
Journal of Climate
23
(
23
),
pp. 6277–6291
.
Cited by:
§1
.
C. Cassou, Y. Kushnir, E. Hawkins, A. Pirani, F. Kucharski, I. Kang, and N. Caltabiano (2018)
Decadal climate variability and predictability: challenges and opportunities
.
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society
99
(
3
),
pp. 479–490
.
Cited by:
§1
.
C. Cassou (2008)
Intraseasonal interaction between the Madden–Julian oscillation and the North Atlantic Oscillation
.
Nature
455
(
7212
),
pp. 523–527
.
Cited by:
§1
.
E. P. Chassignet and X. Xu (2021)
On the importance of high-resolution in large-scale ocean models
.
Advances in Atmospheric Sciences
38
(
10
),
pp. 1621–1634
.
Cited by:
§1
.
CMS (2026)
Global Ocean Gridded L 4 Sea Surface Heights And Derived Variables Reprocessed Copernicus Climate Service
.
Note:
https://data.marine.copernicus.eu/product/SEALEVEL_GLO_PHY_CLIMATE_L4_MY_008_057
[Online; accessed 2026-03-02]
Cited by:
§2.6
.
C. A. DeMott, N. P. Klingaman, and S. J. Woolnough (2015)
Atmosphere-ocean coupled processes in the Madden-Julian oscillation
.
Reviews of Geophysics
53
(
4
),
pp. 1099–1154
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§3.2
,
§3.3
,
§5
.
C. J. Donlon, M. Martin, J. Stark, J. Roberts-Jones, E. Fiedler, and W. Wimmer (2012)
The operational sea surface temperature and sea ice analysis (OSTIA) system
.
Remote sensing of Environment
116
,
pp. 140–158
.
Cited by:
§2.2
.
S. Eastwood, T. Lavergne, and R. Tonboe (2014)
Algorithm theoretical basis document for the OSI SAF global reprocessed sea ice concentration product
.
EUMETSAT Network Satellite Application Facilities
28
.
Cited by:
§2.2
.
ECMWF (2026)
IFS documentation
.
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF)
.
Note:
https://www.ecmwf.int/en/publications/ifs-documentation
Accessed: 2026-02-19
Cited by:
§2
.
M. H. England, S. McGregor, P. Spence, G. A. Meehl, A. Timmermann, W. Cai, A. S. Gupta, M. J. McPhaden, A. Purich, and A. Santoso (2014)
Recent intensification of wind-driven circulation in the Pacific and the ongoing warming hiatus
.
Nature climate change
4
(
3
),
pp. 222–227
.
Cited by:
§1
.
R. Ferrari and C. Wunsch (2009)
Ocean circulation kinetic energy: reservoirs, sources, and sinks
.
Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics
41
(
1
),
pp. 253–282
.
Cited by:
§1
.
C. Ferro (2014)
Fair scores for ensemble forecasts
.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society
140
(
683
),
pp. 1917–1923
.
Cited by:
§2.7
.
C. A. Ferro, D. S. Richardson, and A. P. Weigel (2008)
On the effect of ensemble size on the discrete and continuous ranked probability scores
.
Meteorological Applications: A journal of forecasting, practical applications, training techniques and modelling
15
(
1
),
pp. 19–24
.
Cited by:
§2.7
.
S. Good, E. Fiedler, C. Mao, M. J. Martin, A. Maycock, R. Reid, J. Roberts-Jones, T. Searle, J. Waters, J. While,
et al.
(2020)
The current configuration of the OSTIA system for operational production of foundation sea surface temperature and ice concentration analyses
.
Remote Sensing
12
(
4
),
pp. 720
.
Cited by:
§2.6
.
J. Gottschalck, M. Wheeler, K. Weickmann, F. Vitart, N. Savage, H. Lin, H. Hendon, D. Waliser, K. Sperber, C. Prestrelo,
et al.
(2010)
A framework for assessing operational model MJO forecasts: a project of the CLIVAR Madden-Julian oscillation working group
.
Bull Am Meteorol Soc
91
(
8
),
pp. 1247–1258
.
Cited by:
§2.5
.
J. M. Gregory and P. Forster (2008)
Transient climate response estimated from radiative forcing and observed temperature change
.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres
113
(
D23
).
Cited by:
§1
.
S. M. Griffies and K. Bryan (1997)
Predictability of North Atlantic multidecadal climate variability
.
Science
275
(
5297
),
pp. 181–184
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§5
.
S. M. Griffies, M. Winton, W. G. Anderson, R. Benson, T. L. Delworth, C. O. Dufour, J. P. Dunne, P. Goddard, A. K. Morrison, A. Rosati,
et al.
(2015)
Impacts on ocean heat from transient mesoscale eddies in a hierarchy of climate models
.
Journal of Climate
28
(
3
),
pp. 952–977
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§5
.
J. D. Hall, A. J. Matthews, and D. J. Karoly (2001)
The modulation of tropical cyclone activity in the Australian region by the Madden–Julian oscillation
.
Monthly weather review
129
(
12
),
pp. 2970–2982
.
Cited by:
§1
.
R. Hallberg (2013)
Using a resolution function to regulate parameterizations of oceanic mesoscale eddy effects
.
Ocean Modelling
72
,
pp. 92–103
.
Cited by:
§1
.
H. Hersbach, B. Bell, P. Berrisford, S. Hirahara, A. Horányi, J. Muñoz-Sabater, J. Nicolas, C. Peubey, R. Radu, D. Schepers,
et al.
(2020)
The ERA5 global reanalysis
.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society
146
(
730
),
pp. 1999–2049
.
Cited by:
Appendix A
,
§2.1
,
§2.3
,
§2.6
.
H. T. Hewitt, M. J. Bell, E. P. Chassignet, A. Czaja, D. Ferreira, S. M. Griffies, P. Hyder, J. L. McClean, A. L. New, and M. J. Roberts (2017)
Will high-resolution global ocean models benefit coupled predictions on short-range to climate timescales?
.
Ocean Modelling
120
,
pp. 120–136
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§5
.
J. J. Hirschi, B. Barnier, C. Böning, A. Biastoch, A. T. Blaker, A. Coward, S. Danilov, S. Drijfhout, K. Getzlaff, S. M. Griffies,
et al.
(2020)
The Atlantic meridional overturning circulation in high-resolution models
.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans
125
(
4
),
pp. e2019JC015522
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§5
.
B. J. Hoskins and D. J. Karoly (1981)
The steady linear response of a spherical atmosphere to thermal and orographic forcing
.
Journal of Atmospheric Sciences
38
(
6
),
pp. 1179–1196
.
Cited by:
§1
.
T. Jung and M. Leutbecher (2008)
Scale-dependent verification of ensemble forecasts
.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society: A journal of the atmospheric sciences, applied meteorology and physical oceanography
134
(
633
),
pp. 973–984
.
Cited by:
§2.2
.
T. Kanehama, I. Sandu, A. Beljaars, A. van Niekerk, N. Wedi, S. Boussetta, S. Lang, S. Johnson, and L. Magnusson (2022)
Evaluation and optimizaton of orographic drag in the IFS
.
ECMWF Technical Memoranda
893
,
pp. 31
.
Cited by:
1st item
.
E. Karlowska, A. J. Matthews, B. G. Webber, T. Graham, and P. Xavier (2024)
Two-way feedback between the Madden–Julian Oscillation and diurnal warm layers in a coupled ocean–atmosphere model
.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society
150
(
764
),
pp. 4113–4132
.
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Keeley, K. Mogensen, J. Bidlot, M. Alonso-Balmaseda, and S. Hatfield (2024)
Introduction of a new ocean and sea-ice model based on NEMO4-SI3
.
ECMWF Newsletter
180
,
pp. 24–29
.
Cited by:
3rd item
,
§2.1
.
S. Keeley and K. Mogensen (2018)
Dynamic sea ice in the IFS
.
ECMWF Newsletter
156
,
pp. 23–29
.
Cited by:
§2.2
.
S. Kemball-Cook, B. Wang, and X. Fu (2002)
Simulation of the intraseasonal oscillation in the ECHAM-4 model: the impact of coupling with an ocean model
.
Journal of the atmospheric Sciences
59
(
9
),
pp. 1433–1453
.
Cited by:
§1
.
H. Kim, C. D. Hoyos, P. J. Webster, and I. Kang (2010)
Ocean–atmosphere coupling and the boreal winter MJO
.
Climate dynamics
35
(
5
),
pp. 771–784
.
Cited by:
§3.3
,
§5
.
N. Klingaman and S. Woolnough (2014)
The role of air–sea coupling in the simulation of the Madden–Julian oscillation in the Hadley Centre model
.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society
140
(
684
),
pp. 2272–2286
.
Cited by:
§3.3
,
§5
.
T. Kuhlbrodt and J. Gregory (2012)
Ocean heat uptake and its consequences for the magnitude of sea level rise and climate change
.
Geophysical Research Letters
39
(
18
).
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Lang, M. Rodwell, and D. Schepers (2023)
IFS upgrade brings many improvements and unifies medium-range resolutions
.
ECMWF Newsletter
176
,
pp. 21–28
.
Cited by:
1st item
.
S. T. Lang, A. Dawson, M. Diamantakis, P. Dueben, S. Hatfield, M. Leutbecher, T. Palmer, F. Prates, C. D. Roberts, I. Sandu,
et al.
(2021)
More accuracy with less precision
.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society
147
(
741
),
pp. 4358–4370
.
Cited by:
§2.1
.
T. Lavergne, A. M. Sørensen, S. Kern, R. Tonboe, D. Notz, S. Aaboe, L. Bell, G. Dybkjær, S. Eastwood, C. Gabarro,
et al.
(2019)
Version 2 of the EUMETSAT OSI SAF and ESA CCI sea-ice concentration climate data records
.
The Cryosphere
13
(
1
),
pp. 49–78
.
Cited by:
§2.6
.
R. W. Lee, T. J. Woollings, B. J. Hoskins, K. D. Williams, C. H. O’Reilly, and G. Masato (2018)
Impact of Gulf Stream SST biases on the global atmospheric circulation
.
Climate Dynamics
51
(
9
),
pp. 3369–3387
.
Cited by:
§1
.
J. Lellouche, E. Greiner, R. Bourdallé-Badie, G. Garric, A. Melet, M. Drévillon, C. Bricaud, M. Hamon, O. Le Galloudec, C. Regnier,
et al.
(2021)
The Copernicus global 1/12 oceanic and sea ice GLORYS12 reanalysis
.
Frontiers in Earth Science
9
,
pp. 698876
.
Cited by:
Appendix A
,
§2.3
.
M. Leutbecher, S. Lang, S. Lock, C. D. Roberts, and A. Tsiringakis (2024)
Improving the physical consistency of ensemble forecasts by using SPP in the IFS
.
Vol.
181
.
Cited by:
2nd item
,
§2.1
.
M. Leutbecher, S. Lock, P. Ollinaho, S. T. Lang, G. Balsamo, P. Bechtold, M. Bonavita, H. M. Christensen, M. Diamantakis, E. Dutra,
et al.
(2017)
Stochastic representations of model uncertainties at ECMWF: state of the art and future vision
.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society
143
(
707
),
pp. 2315–2339
.
Cited by:
§2.1
.
M. Leutbecher (2019)
Ensemble size: How suboptimal is less than infinity?
.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society
145
,
pp. 107–128
.
Cited by:
§2.7
.
S. Levitus, J. I. Antonov, T. P. Boyer, O. K. Baranova, H. E. Garcia, R. A. Locarnini, A. V. Mishonov, J. R. Reagan, D. Seidov, E. S. Yarosh,
et al.
(2012)
World ocean heat content and thermosteric sea level change (0–2000 m), 1955–2010
.
Geophysical Research Letters
39
(
10
).
Cited by:
§1
.
S. Liess, L. Bengtsson, and K. Arpe (2004)
The intraseasonal oscillation in ECHAM4 Part I: coupled to a comprehensive ocean model
.
Climate Dynamics
22
(
6
),
pp. 653–669
.
Cited by:
§1
.
H. Lin, G. Brunet, and J. Derome (2009)
An observed connection between the North Atlantic Oscillation and the Madden–Julian oscillation
.
Journal of Climate
22
(
2
),
pp. 364–380
.
Cited by:
§1
.
F. Liu, B. Wang, Y. Ouyang, H. Wang, S. Qiao, G. Chen, and W. Dong (2022)
Intraseasonal variability of global land monsoon precipitation and its recent trend
.
npj Climate and Atmospheric Science
5
(
1
),
pp. 30
.
Cited by:
§1
.
L. Lledó, T. Haiden, J. Schroettle, and R. Forbes (2023)
Scale-dependent verification of precipitation and cloudiness at ECMWF
.
ECMWF Newsletter
174
,
pp. 18–22
.
Cited by:
§4.3
.
S. Lock, S. T. Lang, M. Leutbecher, R. J. Hogan, and F. Vitart (2019)
Treatment of model uncertainty from radiation by the Stochastically Perturbed Parametrization Tendencies (SPPT) scheme and associated revisions in the ECMWF ensembles
.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society
145
,
pp. 75–89
.
Cited by:
§2.1
.
R. A. Madden and P. R. Julian (1971)
Detection of a 40–50 day oscillation in the zonal wind in the tropical Pacific
.
Journal of Atmospheric Sciences
28
(
5
),
pp. 702–708
.
Cited by:
§3.3
.
R. A. Madden and P. R. Julian (1972)
Description of global-scale circulation cells in the tropics with a 40–50 day period
.
Journal of Atmospheric Sciences
29
(
6
),
pp. 1109–1123
.
Cited by:
§1
.
G. Madec, R. Bourdallé-Badie, J. Chanut, E. Clementi, A. Coward, C. Ethé, D. Iovino, D. Lea, C. Lévy, T. Lovato, N. Martin, S. Masson, S. Mocavero, C. Rousset, D. Storkey, M. Vancoppenolle, S. Müeller, G. Nurser, M. Bell, and G. Samson (2019)
NEMO ocean engine
.
Technical report
Vol.
27
,
Zenodo
,
Institut Pierre-Simon Laplace (IPSL)
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
3rd item
.
E. D. Maloney and D. B. Chelton (2006)
An assessment of the sea surface temperature influence on surface wind stress in numerical weather prediction and climate models
.
Journal of climate
19
(
12
),
pp. 2743–2762
.
Cited by:
§5
.
M. J. McPhaden (1999)
Genesis and evolution of the 1997-98 El Niño
.
Science
283
(
5404
),
pp. 950–954
.
Cited by:
§1
.
C. J. Merchant, O. Embury, C. E. Bulgin, T. Block, G. K. Corlett, E. Fiedler, S. A. Good, J. Mittaz, N. A. Rayner, D. Berry,
et al.
(2019)
Satellite-based time-series of sea-surface temperature since 1981 for climate applications
.
Scientific data
6
(
1
),
pp. 1–18
.
Cited by:
Figure 12
,
§2.6
,
§4.3
.
K. S. Mogensen, L. Magnusson, and J. Bidlot (2017)
Tropical cyclone sensitivity to ocean coupling in the ECMWF coupled model
.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans
122
(
5
),
pp. 4392–4412
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§2.2
,
§5
.
J. D. Neelin, D. S. Battisti, A. C. Hirst, F. Jin, Y. Wakata, T. Yamagata, and S. E. Zebiak (1998)
ENSO theory
.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans
103
(
C7
),
pp. 14261–14290
.
Cited by:
§1
.
P. Ollinaho, S. Lock, M. Leutbecher, P. Bechtold, A. Beljaars, A. Bozzo, R. M. Forbes, T. Haiden, R. J. Hogan, and I. Sandu (2017)
Towards process-level representation of model uncertainties: stochastically perturbed parametrizations in the ECMWF ensemble
.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society
143
(
702
),
pp. 408–422
.
Cited by:
2nd item
.
C. Pelletier, C. D. Roberts, F. Vitart, M. A. Balmaseda, K. Mogensen, and I. Sandu (2023)
Generating ocean initial condition for coupled forecasts through nudged NEMO experiments
.
In
EGU General Assembly 2023
,
Vienna, Austria
.
Note:
EGU23-11718
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
Appendix A
.
I. Polichtchouk, S. Massart, and Z. Kipling (2025a)
Upgrade to IFS cycle 50r1
.
Vol.
185
.
Cited by:
3rd item
.
I. Polichtchouk, K. S. Mogensen, E. R. Sanabia, S. R. Jayne, L. Magnusson, C. R. Densmore, S. Hatfield, I. Hadade, N. Wedi, V. Anantharaj,
et al.
(2025b)
Effects of atmosphere and ocean horizontal model resolution on tropical cyclone and upper-ocean response forecasts in four major hurricanes
.
Monthly Weather Review
153
(
11
),
pp. 2257–2278
.
Cited by:
§5
.
C. A. Reynolds, W. Crawford, P. G. Thoppil, S. S. Rushley, M. A. Janiga, J. J. McLay, and N. P. Barton (2025)
Impact of ocean resolution on Navy ESPC forecast skill
.
Weather and Forecasting
40
(
8
),
pp. 1463–1479
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§5
.
C. Roberts, D. Calvert, N. Dunstone, L. Hermanson, M. Palmer, and D. Smith (2016)
On the drivers and predictability of seasonal-to-interannual variations in regional sea level
.
Journal of Climate
29
(
21
),
pp. 7565–7585
.
Cited by:
§2.6
.
C. Roberts, F. Vitart, M. Balmaseda, and F. Molteni (2020)
The time-scale-dependent response of the wintertime North Atlantic to increased ocean model resolution in a coupled forecast model
.
Journal of Climate
33
(
9
),
pp. 3663–3689
.
Cited by:
§1
.
C. Roberts, F. Vitart, and M. Balmaseda (2021)
Hemispheric impact of North Atlantic SSTs in subseasonal forecasts
.
Geophysical Research Letters
48
(
4
),
pp. e2020GL0911446
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§5
.
C. D. Roberts, M. A. Balmaseda, L. Ferranti, and F. Vitart (2023)
Euro-Atlantic weather regimes and their modulation by tropospheric and stratospheric teleconnection pathways in ECMWF reforecasts
.
Monthly Weather Review
151
(
10
),
pp. 2779–2799
.
Cited by:
§2
.
C. D. Roberts, M. A. Balmaseda, S. Tietsche, and F. Vitart (2022)
Sensitivity of ECMWF coupled forecasts to improved initialization of the ocean mesoscale
.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society
148
(
749
),
pp. 3694–3714
.
Cited by:
Appendix A
,
§1
,
§2.7
,
§5
,
§5
.
C. D. Roberts, B. Ingleby, A. Geer, E. Hólm, M. Janousek, F. Prates, and M. Rodwell (2024)
IFS upgrade improves near-surface wind and temperature forecasts
.
ECMWF Newsletter
181
,
pp. 16–25
.
Cited by:
2nd item
.
C. D. Roberts and M. Leutbecher (2025)
Unbiased calculation, evaluation, and calibration of ensemble forecast anomalies
.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society
151
(
771
),
pp. e4993
.
Cited by:
§2.7
.
C. D. Roberts and F. Vitart (2026)
Ensemble reliability and the signal-to-noise paradox in ECMWF subseasonal forecasts
.
External Links:
2411.17694
,
Link
Cited by:
§2.5
.
J. Robson, R. Sutton, and D. Smith (2012a)
Initialized decadal predictions of the rapid warming of the North Atlantic Ocean in the mid 1990s
.
Geophysical Research Letters
39
(
19
).
Cited by:
§1
.
J. Robson, R. Sutton, K. Lohmann, D. Smith, and M. D. Palmer (2012b)
Causes of the rapid warming of the North Atlantic Ocean in the mid-1990s
.
Journal of Climate
25
(
12
),
pp. 4116–4134
.
Cited by:
§1
.
K. Seo, W. Wang, J. Gottschalck, Q. Zhang, J. E. Schemm, W. R. Higgins, and A. Kumar (2009)
Evaluation of MJO forecast skill from several statistical and dynamical forecast models
.
Journal of Climate
22
(
9
),
pp. 2372–2388
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§5
.
A. Shelly, P. Xavier, D. Copsey, T. Johns, J. M. Rodríguez, S. Milton, and N. Klingaman (2014)
Coupled versus uncoupled hindcast simulations of the Madden-Julian Oscillation in the Year of Tropical Convection
.
Geophysical Research Letters
41
(
15
),
pp. 5670–5677
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§5
.
R. d. Small, S. P. deSzoeke, S. Xie, L. O’neill, H. Seo, Q. Song, P. Cornillon, M. Spall, and S. Minobe (2008)
Air–sea interaction over ocean fronts and eddies
.
Dynamics of Atmospheres and Oceans
45
(
3-4
),
pp. 274–319
.
Cited by:
§1
.
K. Sperber (2004)
Madden-Julian variability in NCAR CAM2.0 and CCSM2.0
.
Climate Dynamics
23
(
3
),
pp. 259–278
.
Cited by:
§1
.
T. N. Stockdale, D. L. Anderson, J. O. S. Alves, and M. A. Balmaseda (1998)
Global seasonal rainfall forecasts using a coupled ocean–atmosphere model
.
Nature
392
(
6674
),
pp. 370–373
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§5
.
D. Storkey, A. T. Blaker, P. Mathiot, A. Megann, Y. Aksenov, E. W. Blockley, D. Calvert, T. Graham, H. T. Hewitt, P. Hyder,
et al.
(2018)
UK Global Ocean GO6 and GO7: A traceable hierarchy of model resolutions
.
Geoscientific Model Development
11
(
8
),
pp. 3187–3213
.
Cited by:
§2.1
.
L. D. Talley (2013)
Closure of the global overturning circulation through the Indian, Pacific, and Southern Oceans: schematics and transports
.
Oceanography
26
(
1
),
pp. 80–97
.
Cited by:
§1
.
K. E. Trenberth, G. W. Branstator, D. Karoly, A. Kumar, N. Lau, and C. Ropelewski (1998)
Progress during TOGA in understanding and modeling global teleconnections associated with tropical sea surface temperatures
.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans
103
(
C7
),
pp. 14291–14324
.
Cited by:
§1
.
K. E. Trenberth and J. M. Caron (2001)
Estimates of meridional atmosphere and ocean heat transports
.
Journal of Climate
14
(
16
),
pp. 3433–3443
.
Cited by:
§1
.
S. M. Uppala, P. Kållberg, A. J. Simmons, U. Andrae, V. D. C. Bechtold, M. Fiorino, J. Gibson, J. Haseler, A. Hernandez, G. Kelly,
et al.
(2005)
The ERA-40 re-analysis
.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society: A journal of the atmospheric sciences, applied meteorology and physical oceanography
131
(
612
),
pp. 2961–3012
.
Cited by:
§2.2
.
M. Vancoppenolle, C. Rousset, E. Blockley, Y. Aksenov, D. Feltham, T. Fichefet, G. Garric, V. Guémas, D. Iovino, S. Keeley, G. Madec, F. Massonnet, J. Ridley, D. Schroeder, and S. Tietsche (2023)
SI3
.
Technical report
Zenodo
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
3rd item
.
F. Vitart (2017)
Madden—Julian Oscillation prediction and teleconnections in the S2S database
.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society
143
(
706
),
pp. 2210–2220
.
Cited by:
§3.3
.
K. Von Schuckmann, A. Minière, F. Gues, F. J. Cuesta-Valero, G. Kirchengast, S. Adusumilli, F. Straneo, M. Ablain, R. P. Allan, P. M. Barker,
et al.
(2023)
Heat stored in the Earth system 1960–2020: where does the energy go?
.
Earth System Science Data
15
(
4
),
pp. 1675–1709
.
Cited by:
§1
.
M. C. Wheeler and H. H. Hendon (2004)
An all-season real-time multivariate MJO index: Development of an index for monitoring and prediction
.
Monthly weather review
132
(
8
),
pp. 1917–1932
.
Cited by:
§2.5
.
S. Woolnough, F. Vitart, and M. Balmaseda (2007)
The role of the ocean in the Madden–Julian Oscillation: implications for MJO prediction
.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society: A journal of the atmospheric sciences, applied meteorology and physical oceanography
133
(
622
),
pp. 117–128
.
Cited by:
§1
,
§3.3
,
§5
,
§5
.
L. Zampieri, G. Arduini, M. Holland, S. P. Keeley, K. Mogensen, M. D. Shupe, and S. Tietsche (2023)
A machine learning correction model of the winter clear-sky temperature bias over the Arctic sea ice in atmospheric reanalyses
.
Monthly Weather Review
151
(
6
),
pp. 1443–1458
.
Cited by:
§3.2
.
C. Zhang, M. Dong, S. Gualdi, H. H. Hendon, E. D. Maloney, A. Marshall, K. R. Sperber, and W. Wang (2006)
Simulations of the Madden–Julian oscillation in four pairs of coupled and uncoupled global models
.
Climate Dynamics
27
(
6
),
pp. 573–592
.
Cited by:
§1
.
H. Zuo, M. A. Balmaseda, E. de Boisseson, P. Browne, M. Chrust, S. Keeley, K. Mogensen, C. Pelletier, P. de Rosnay, and T. Takakura (2024)
ECMWF’s next ensemble reanalysis system for ocean and sea ice: ORAS6
.
ECMWF Newsletter
180
,
pp. 30–36
.
Cited by:
Figure 1
,
§2.1
,
§2.1
.
H. Zuo, M. A. Balmaseda, S. Tietsche, K. Mogensen, and M. Mayer (2019)
The ECMWF operational ensemble reanalysis–analysis system for ocean and sea ice: a description of the system and assessment
.
Ocean science
15
(
3
),
pp. 779–808
.
Cited by:
§2.1
.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA