Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2605.18268v1 [physics.plasm-ph] 18 May 2026
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
Ethan Attwood
Contact author: ethan.attwood@york.ac.uk
York Plasma Institute, University of York, York, UK
J. W. S. Cook
james.cook@ukaea.uk
UK Atomic Energy Authority, Culham Campus, Culham, UK
Centre for Fusion, Space and Astrophysics, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Peter Hill
peter.hill@york.ac.uk
York Plasma Institute, University of York, York, UK
Abstract
Ion Cyclotron Emission (ICE) is a ubiquitous magnetised plasma phenomenon previously detected on virtually all large magnetic fusion devices and whose diagnostic potential for future power plants rests upon an accurate mapping of plasma parameters to spectra. This work demonstrates that the inverse problem is solved by training Time-Series Extrinsic Regression (TSER) models on synthetic ICE spectra from oblique propagation angle sweeps of nonlinear fully kinetic 1D3V particle-in-cell simulations of the magnetoacoustic cyclotron instability. Using datasets from a systematically constructed scan over reactor-relevant ranges of background magnetic field strength, density, and alpha-particle velocity pitch (
v
∥
/
|
v
|
v_{\parallel}/|v|
) and concentration, we show that these bulk and fast ion parameters may be recovered from a JET ICE spectrum via TSER models with near real-time capability.
Magnetically-confined fusion devices require a network of diagnostics to determine plasma properties critical to safe and effective operation. Next-generation devices increasingly demand diagnostics that maximize information efficiency and wall space for tritium breeding through the surrounding lithium blanket. For example, nearly 20% of the outboard vessel area of ITER is used for diagnostics, damaging the tritium-breeding ratio, which is critical for the transition from research-scale to grid-scale fusion devices
[
51
]
. Diagnostic solutions demonstrating a high technical readiness and providing data on a wide variety of plasma characteristics are more important than ever.
Ion Cyclotron Emission (ICE) is a widespread plasma phenomenon, occurring in virtually all large hot magnetized plasmas
[
13
,
12
,
23
,
43
,
20
,
36
,
24
,
34
,
40
,
2
,
50
,
32
]
and experimentally observed as suprathermal emission with spectral peaks at multiple harmonics of the ion cyclotron frequency. Typically, ICE requires a minority fast ion population in cyclotron resonance with a fast Alfvén wave propagating approximately perpendicular to the background magnetic field, which gives rise to the magnetoacoustic cyclotron instability (MCI), the leading mechanism underpinning ICE
[
19
,
18
,
22
,
6
,
24
,
41
,
8
,
46
]
. An abundant source of fast ions in a tokamak is the fusion reaction itself, thereby correlating ICE observations with fusion reaction rate as well as with the magnetic field strength and the spatial and velocity distribution of energetic ion populations via the finer details of the kinetic instability
[
12
,
35
]
. Ion cyclotron resonance heated
[
34
]
and neutral beam injection ions
[
42
]
are also known to excite ICE.
The Particle-In-Cell (PIC) method
[
29
,
5
,
1
]
is a common technique in computational plasma physics for self-consistently solving Maxwell’s equations on a grid simultaneously with currents and charge densities provided by plasma macroparticles subject to the Lorentz force. PIC is ideal for computationally efficient models of nonlinear kinetic phenomena evolving at very fast timescales such as ion gyroperiods, and has been widely applied to ICE investigations
[
11
,
6
,
24
,
42
,
7
,
17
]
. Resolution constraints placed on the number and size of cells, particle numbers and simulation durations make large parameter scans with PIC simulations computationally expensive albeit tractable. Reasonable simplifications can be made such as lowering dimensionality, which we apply in this work by rendering our problem in so-called 1D3V: one spatial dimension of variation is allowed while vector fields, including velocities, retain three components. In this letter, we exploit a fully kinetic approach for all species to capture electron Landau damping with non-zero parallel wavenumber behaviour and ion gyro-resonances crucial to accurately modelling the MCI
[
10
]
. In order to include some two dimensional physics, we run four 1D3V simulations for each set of parameters: one perpendicular to the magnetic field,
90
∘
90^{\circ}
, and three at oblique angles,
92
∘
92^{\circ}
,
94
∘
94^{\circ}
and
96
∘
96^{\circ}
. This retains one dimensional nonlinear physics and introduces linear two dimensional physics at a substantially lower computational cost than 2D3V simulations. Experimental ICE measurements will tend to reflect the nonlinear regime of the MCI due to its dominance past an initial single-digit number of ion gyroperiods
[
6
]
as well as the complexities of the machine geometry, wave propagation, and sink and source terms. Fortunately, analytic approaches and periodic 1D3V PIC code simulations that mimic the infinite homogeneous plasma limit have been able to explain many aspects of ICE, including how the spectral features that arise during the linear phase of the instability leave their imprint on the nonlinear spectrum
[
11
,
6
,
42
,
7
]
. Nonlinearity, enabled by PIC, is required in order to account for the magnitude of energy transfer from fast ions and for wave-wave coupling of power from higher to lower harmonics
[
9
]
and hence is essential for comparing simulation results to experimental observations.
We performed parameter scans to form ICE-relevant datasets, on which machine learning models were trained to infer meaningful physical properties. Parameter sets can be designed specifically for individual magnetised fusion devices, a natural first step in the development of synthetic diagnostics. We chose JET-like parameters due to the availability of ICE observations from tritium experiments with a high drive of fusion alpha-particles which, as opposed to lower energy neutral injection ions, feature increased ICE intensity for this first of a kind study.
The dataset was exploited by regressing spectra against the input simulation parameters. Regression of such sequential data (known in machine learning literature as “time-series” data; whether the dynamics are temporal or based on some other sequential ordering is immaterial) against continuous external values is a young field, having only been formalised by Tan et al. in 2021
[
47
]
. ICE signals derived from simulations are power spectra calculated by Fourier transforming temporal field data, which we call synthetic spectra as we use them as analogues for experimentally observed spectra. We applied this approach to ICE where we trained models capable of determining the following four quantities from synthetic ICE spectra: the equilibrium magnetic field strength (
B
0
B_{0}
); electron density (
n
e
n_{e}
); concentration of fusion-born alpha-particles (
n
α
/
n
e
n_{\alpha}/n_{e}
); and alpha-particle velocity distribution pitch
λ
=
u
∥
/
(
u
∥
2
+
u
⟂
2
)
\lambda={u_{\parallel}}/\sqrt{(u_{\parallel}^{2}+u_{\perp}^{2})}
, defined as the ratio of parallel bulk speed to the initial speed, which determines their distribution function in Equation
1
.
In our simulations, three species were modelled: electrons and background fuel deuterons, both initially at 10kev, and a minority of energetic alpha particles approximated as a “ring-beam” delta function,
f
​
(
v
∥
,
v
⟂
)
∝
exp
⁡
(
−
(
v
∥
−
u
∥
)
2
v
t
h
,
∥
2
−
(
v
⟂
−
u
⟂
)
2
v
t
​
h
,
⟂
2
)
,
f(v_{\parallel},v_{\perp})\propto\exp\left(-\frac{(v_{\parallel}-u_{\parallel})^{2}}{{v_{th,\parallel}^{2}}}-\frac{(v_{\perp}-u_{\perp})^{2}}{{v_{th,\perp}^{2}}}\right),
(1)
which initialises particle velocities according to bulk speeds parallel and perpendicular to the magnetic field direction,
u
∥
u_{\parallel}
and
u
⟂
u_{\perp}
respectively, and Maxwellian thermal speeds
v
t
h
,
∥
v_{th,\parallel}
and
v
t
​
h
,
⟂
v_{th,\perp}
. An homogeneous magnetic field was initialised predominantly in
z
z
, perpendicular to the spatial domain
x
x
, such that the MCI is most strongly excited
[
25
]
.
To generate the datasets, four quantities were sampled using a Latin hypercube strategy, the minimum and maximum values of which are shown in Table
1
. Electron density and alpha-particle fraction were sampled uniformly in log space. Static parameters used in all simulations are listed in Table
2
. Initially 100 parameter sets were simulated; later 10 more were added using another Latin hypercube near to the known parameter values of JET pulse #26148 (
B
0
=
2
−
3
B_{0}=2-3
T,
λ
=
0.3
−
0.7
\lambda=0.3-0.7
,
n
e
=
(
1
−
2
)
×
10
19
​
m
−
3
n_{e}=(1-2)\times 10^{19}\mathrm{m}^{-3}
,
n
α
/
n
e
=
10
−
4
−
10
−
3
n_{\alpha}/n_{e}=10^{-4}-10^{-3}
) as documented in Ref.
[
12
]
. Reference machine values are shown in the rightmost column for
B
0
B_{0}
and
n
e
n_{e}
in Table
1
. As ICE originates from a variety of fast ion sources (NBI, ICRH, fusion reactions) in both the tokamak core
[
40
,
41
]
and edge plasma regions
[
7
]
, there are a number of valid operational combinations of parameters such as density and species temperature. This dataset trades specificity to one particular regime for a versatile training set representative of a broad sample of ICE origins.
Parameter
Min
Max
Mean
SD
JET
ITER
STEP
B
0
B_{0}
[T]
0.5
5.0
2.75
2.75
1.16
1.16
3.4
5.3
3.2
λ
​
(
v
∥
/
|
v
|
)
\lambda\,(v_{\parallel}/|v|)
0.01
0.99
0.500
0.500
0.283
0.283
–
–
–
n
e
n_{e}
[
log
10
⁡
(
m
−
3
)
\log_{10}(\mathrm{m}^{-3})
]
19
19
20
20
19.5
19.5
0.289
0.289
19.7
19.5
20.0
n
α
/
n
e
n_{\alpha}/n_{e}
[
log
10
\log_{10}
]
−
4
-4
−
2
-2
−
3.00
-3.00
0.577
0.577
–
–
–
Table 1
:
Simulation parameter scan variable ranges, means and standard deviations (SD). Electron density (
n
e
n_{e}
) and alpha-particle fraction (
n
α
/
n
e
n_{\alpha}/n_{e}
) were sampled uniformly in
log
10
\log_{10}
space. The rightmost columns show typical values of
B
B
(toroidal, on-axis) and
n
e
n_{e}
in previous D-T experiments on JET
[
26
]
, or projected for ITER
[
44
]
and STEP
[
49
]
. Densities are averages across major radius and operational configurations. Minimum and maximum values are shown at the precision to which they were specified; mean and SD’s were calculated post-sampling and shown to 3 significant figures.
Symbol
Description
Value
T
D
,
e
T_{D,e}
background temperature [eV]
10000
E
α
E_{\alpha}
α
\alpha
particle energy [eV]
3500000
p
α
p_{\alpha}
α
\alpha
particle momentum [kgms
-1
]
2
​
m
α
​
q
e
​
E
α
\sqrt{2m_{\alpha}q_{e}E_{\alpha}}
p
beam
p_{\text{beam}}
(
u
∥
​
m
α
)
(u_{\parallel}m_{\alpha})
[kgms
-1
]
p
α
​
λ
p_{\alpha}\lambda
p
ring
p_{\text{ring}}
(
u
⟂
​
m
α
)
(u_{\perp}m_{\alpha})
[kgms
-1
]
p
α
​
1
−
λ
2
p_{\alpha}\sqrt{1-\lambda^{2}}
p
spread
p_{\text{spread}}
(
v
t
​
h
​
m
α
)
(v_{th}m_{\alpha})
[kgms
-1
]
0.06
​
p
ring
0.06p_{\text{ring}}
t
sim
t_{\text{sim}}
simulation time [
τ
c
,
α
\tau_{c,\alpha}
]
16
N
Ω
N_{\Omega}
Nyquist frequency [
Ω
c
,
α
\Omega_{c,\alpha}
]
80
n
samples
n_{\text{samples}}
number of time samples
2
​
t
sim
​
N
Ω
2t_{\text{sim}}N_{\Omega}
n
ppc
n_{\text{ppc}}
particles per species per cell
250
Table 2
:
Static parameters used in all simulations. Times and frequencies were normalised to alpha-particle gyromotion (
τ
c
,
α
\tau_{c,\alpha}
and
Ω
c
,
α
\Omega_{c,\alpha}
respectively).
All simulations were run on ARCHER2
[
4
]
, the UK Tier 1 HPC resource, with 250 macroparticles per species per cell for 16 deuteron gyroperiods, with a diagnostic output rate allowing resolution of data in frequency space up to 80 deuteron gyrofrequencies, which exceeds the frequency range of common experimental ICE spectra
[
12
,
42
]
. Cell widths were set to the smallest of the electron thermal gyroradius or the Debye length for each set of parameters, indicated by previous studies
[
8
,
45
]
to benefit energy conservation. EPOCH default settings were used except for the enabling of
δ
​
f
\delta f
, a technique used to suppress numerical noise
[
1
,
30
]
, and higher-order particle shape functions (a third-order b-spline)
[
1
]
. A comparison of a subset of particle and field energy diagnostics with and without using
δ
​
f
\delta f
for the background deuterons and electrons showed no appreciable impact on the rate or magnitude of MCI evolution. A full-
f
f
treatment was preserved for the fast alpha population. Running all simulations combined took approximately 1.55M CPU hours. Analysis of the outputs common to all simulations took approximately 600 CPU hours split across ARCHER2 and Viking, the University of York’s compute cluster. This relatively modest level of computational resource is within reach of the majority of fusion research groups.
The experimentally observed power spectra considered here and our synthetic spectra are a function of frequency only; all wavenumber and propagation information is lost. The electromagnetic field perturbations (parallel magnetic field
δ
​
B
z
\delta B_{z}
, electrostatic component
δ
​
E
x
\delta E_{x}
and Alfvénic electric component
δ
​
E
y
\delta E_{y}
) are integrated over one-dimensional wavenumbers and summed across all four propagation angles of our 110 cases. A representative spectrum of the compressional magnetic field component
δ
​
B
z
\delta B_{z}
, which provides the principle analogue for the MCI as measured by a magnetic field probe, is shown in Figure
1
and illustrates that the dominant spectral features can arise from different propagation angles.
Figure 1
:
Frequency power spectra in
δ
​
B
z
\delta B_{z}
for four propagation angles of parameter set 75. Successive peaks are seen at integer harmonics of the deuteron/alpha cyclotron frequency, with peaks at
8
−
16
​
Ω
c
,
α
8-16\Omega_{c,\alpha}
(frequency normalised to the alpha-particle cyclotron frequency), indicative of MCI activity. All four angles share a region of activity below
12
​
Ω
c
,
α
12\Omega_{c,\alpha}
. The perpendicular case,
90
∘
90^{\circ}
shows two distinct regions of excitation around
8
​
Ω
c
,
α
8\Omega_{c,\alpha}
and
15
​
Ω
c
,
α
15\Omega_{c,\alpha}
and the
96
∘
96^{\circ}
spectral amplitudes are 1000 times less powerful. The parameters are
B
0
=
2.0
B_{0}=2.0
T ,
λ
=
0.49
\lambda=0.49
,
n
e
=
1.4
×
10
19
n_{e}=1.4\times 10^{19}
and
n
α
=
2.8
×
10
−
3
​
n
e
n_{\alpha}=2.8\times 10^{-3}n_{e}
.
Trends in peak grouping, splitting, and amplitude with variation in propagation angle do not vary straightforwardly with the parameters. The fast magnetoacoustic dispersion surface on the parallel and perpendicular wavenumber plane is controlled largely by density and magnetic field strength. However, the complicated and sometimes disconnected regions of instability on this surface are determined further by the details of the fast ion distribution function and the damping arising from the temperatures of electrons and fuel ions: see Fig. 2 of Ref.
[
10
]
. The mapping from spectra to these physics parameters includes details of these complex linear and nonlinear physical processes, which necessarily must be encapsulated by well-performing regression models.
Time series analysis is the field of performing machine learning based on a sequence of values whose order and magnitude relative to the rest of the series is significant
[
47
]
. Time Series Extrinsic Regression (TSER) is a novel approach in plasma physics, having to our knowledge only once previously been applied to the reconstruction of missing electron temperature data
[
52
]
. We use the TSER
[
3
,
27
,
37
]
capabilities of the Aeon time series analysis toolkit
[
38
]
to apply these algorithms to the novel area of ICE parameter inference.
Each TSER model was trained on four input channels (
log
10
\log_{10}
of the three EM spectra on a frequency range normalized by the per-case gyrofrequency; the fourth channel mapped gyrofrequencies to Hz) and regressed against a single output channel at a time (each of the plasma parameters in Table
1
). Cross-validation strategies are used in machine learning research to mitigate against over-fitting during model training. This involves partitioning the training data into folds and omitting a subset of the data, which is subsequently used to test the model. We use a leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV) strategy, where only one case is left out and reserved for testing, to maximise utility of our computationally expensive nonlinear simulations. Error metrics are evaluated over all LOOCV folds to generate holistic measures of model performance. Figure
2
shows the coefficient of determination (
R
2
R^{2}
) across predictions for every fold.
Figure 2
:
TSER results of a leave-one-out cross-validation of six algorithms against four simulation parameters. Highest accuracy algorithms in LOOCV and experimental comparison were selected based on the coefficient of determination (higher is better) across all predictions. Error bars show the mean standard error of prediction across all folds of the LOOCV.
Our pipeline was run on 13 extrinsic regression algorithms available in Aeon: Catch22
[
33
]
, Hydra
[
16
]
, KNeighborsTimeSeries
[
38
]
, MiniROCKET
[
14
]
, MultiROCKET
[
48
]
, MultiROCKET-Hydra
[
16
]
, QUANT
[
15
]
, RandomInterval
[
38
]
, RandomIntervalSpectralEnsemble
[
31
]
, RDST
[
28
]
, TimeSeriesForest
[
21
]
, Summary
[
38
]
, and the Dummy regressor, which predicts the mean of the data. They can handle multivariate data and tractably train models for the four fields with
110
110
folds per algorithm required for a LOOCV. Hydra was the best performing algorithm by
R
2
R^{2}
for two out of four simulation parameters and was within one standard error (by root mean squared error (RMSE)) of the top performance on all parameters. All predictions made by Hydra for the four simulation parameters are shown in Figure
3
. On a 13th generation 4.6GHz Intel i5-1335U, training of 110 folds of Hydra took approximately 2.5 CPU hours, while prediction of a single value took 100ms.
Figure 3
:
Hydra-generated normalised predictions of each parameter. The datapoints are the single test points left out in each fold of a leave-one-out cross-validation.
From experiments using the synthetic
δ
​
B
z
\delta B_{z}
,
δ
​
E
x
\delta E_{x}
and
δ
​
E
y
\delta E_{y}
spectra across four propagation angles, we determine that Aeon’s implementations of Hydra, MultiROCKET-Hydra (MRH; excepting pitch) and RDST (excepting alpha concentration) perform the best on prediction of all four simulation inputs to within statistical significance, as defined by one standard error from the mean prediction. RMSE has the desirable property of units equal to the original data, so prediction errors can be interpreted in terms of physical quantities. A summary of these is shown in Table
3
, where
B
0
B_{0}
, pitch, density and fast alpha concentration are predicted to within
0.6
​
σ
0.6\sigma
of the training data mean.
Parameter
Best Model
RMSE
RMSE (denorm.)
B
0
B_{0}
KNN
0.025
0.028T
λ
​
(
v
∥
/
|
v
|
)
\lambda\,(v_{\parallel}/|v|)
Hydra
0.589
0.160
n
e
n_{e}
MRH
0.435
[
2.20
,
3.96
]
×
10
19
​
m
−
3
[2.20,3.96]\times 10^{19}m^{-3}
n
α
/
n
e
n_{\alpha}/n_{e}
Hydra
0.316
[
6.17
,
14.1
]
×
10
−
4
[6.17,14.1]\times 10^{-4}
Table 3
:
Best RMSE values and errors (ranges for log-sampled variables) achieved during extrinsic regression of power spectra against simulation input parameters, including denormalised RMSE values in original units. KNN is Aeon’s implementation of a standard 1-nearest-neighbour algorithm. Note that for
B
0
B_{0}
, 11/13 algorithms produced statistically identical
R
2
R^{2}
values of greater than 98%.
To provide a comparison to experiment, the ICE intensity spectrum from JET pulse No. 26148 was recovered from Figure 2 of Ref.
[
12
]
. This JET shot used deuterium and 11% tritium and was taken close to the time of peak neutron emission, supporting its use as an experimental comparison for ICE stimulated predominantly by fusion alphas in a bulk deuterium plasma. This spectrum resolved frequencies up to
∼
187
{\sim}187
MHz and was obtained using a monopole antenna detecting the near-perpendicular component of
B
→
\vec{B}
. A comparable training set was built by truncating simulated
δ
​
B
z
\delta B_{z}
power spectra to this frequency range (resolving less than the first 5
Ω
c
,
α
\Omega_{c,\alpha}
in the cases with smallest magnetic field). The unit of ICE intensity in the experimental data is dB without a stated physical baseline, so all simulated spectra were converted to a dB scale relative to their global power minimum (
2.23
×
10
−
12
​
T
2
2.23\times 10^{-12}\mathrm{T}^{2}
). The ground truth value of
B
=
2.21
B=2.21
T was evaluated based on the
17
±
0.5
17\pm 0.5
MHz spacing of the spectral peaks. Alpha-particle velocity pitch of 0.4 was estimated from Figure 15 of Ref.
[
12
]
. The density at the point of emission is inferred in Ref.
[
12
]
to be
1.7
×
10
19
​
m
−
3
1.7\times 10^{19}\mathrm{m}^{-3}
. The alpha-particle fraction was evaluated by Cottrell et al. using TRANSP and stated in Figure 18 of Ref.
[
12
]
. Training was run over all algorithms used during the previous LOOCV. Results from the nine best performing algorithms are shown in Figure
4
. The best results by mean absolute error per parameter are shown in Table
4
.
Figure 4
:
Predictions made by TSER models trained on
δ
​
B
z
\delta B_{z}
spectra from all simulations truncated to equal frequency bandwidths (
∼
0
−
187
{\sim}0-187
MHz) against JET pulse No. 26148 ICE spectrum data extracted from Ref.
[
12
]
. Experimental values (excluding alpha-particle velocity pitch) are shown with dotted lines, with uncertainties denoted by shaded regions. The uncertainty in
B
0
B_{0}
was estimated from measurements of the spectral peak spacing. The uncertainty in pitch was estimated from inspection of the shaded regions in Figures 15 and 18 of Ref.
[
12
]
. The uncertainty in density was found from correlation with the range of possible major radius values in Figure 7
[
12
]
. The uncertainty in alpha-particle concentration was based on rationalising the radial density profiles in Figure 7
[
12
]
with estimates from TRANSP, and the large variation between core and edge values. The x-axis is scaled to include the entire training data simulation range.
Parameter
True Value
Best Prediction
Best Model
B
0
B_{0}
[T]
2.21
±
0.07
2.21\pm 0.07
2.19
±
0.14
2.19\pm 0.14
MiniRocket
λ
\lambda
0.40
±
0.05
0.40\pm 0.05
0.38
±
0.02
0.38\pm 0.02
TSF
n
e
n_{e}
[
10
19
​
m
−
3
10^{19}m^{-3}
]
1.7
±
0.5
1.7\pm 0.5
2.0
±
0.1
2.0\pm 0.1
RDST
n
α
/
n
e
n_{\alpha}/n_{e}
[
10
−
4
10^{-4}
]
1.5
±
3.0
1.5\pm 3.0
3.8
±
0.5
3.8\pm 0.5
Catch22
Table 4
:
Values shown are the true experimental value, the best prediction by mean absolute error, and the model from which the best prediction was obtained. Uncertainty values for predictions are calculated as one standard deviation across 20 repeats. Uncertainty in the experimental data is transcribed or inferred from Ref.
[
12
]
; see Figure
4
.
A significant limitation when testing models against experimental data is the frequency bandwidth. The temporal length and output frequency of the simulations were set dynamically to ensure sufficient resolution up to 80
Ω
c
,
α
\Omega_{c,\alpha}
. In performing the LOOCV analysis, the TSER algorithms are passed spectra discretized onto an axis normalized to the per-simulation cyclotron frequency, and hence this normalization cannot provide discriminative frequency information. This information is added back by feeding in a fourth channel that maps cyclotron harmonics to Hz. When training the models for use with an experimental JET spectrum, however, the synthetic spectra are truncated and interpolated onto the frequency axis of the experimental observations. Hence higher frequency information is discarded; in the lowest-
B
0
B_{0}
cases, the bandwidth is less than
5
​
Ω
c
,
α
5\Omega_{c,\alpha}
.
Figure
4
shows an overlap between one standard deviation of MiniROCKET’s prediction range and the experimental value’s uncertainty for all parameters, with Hydra also predicting
B
0
B_{0}
well, and MultiROCKET/MultiROCKET-Hydra working well for pitch and density to within uncertainty. Alpha concentration was generally predicted least successfully, though the experimental value is near the lower limit of the training data and most algorithms’ predictions correctly return values lower than the training mean. Given the data range, collection and dB scale limitations making comparison to simulated spectra more difficult, this is a successful result. LOOCV performance indicates the capacity of a model to learn the training data, and the experimental comparison indicates the training data’s proximity to a real spectrum and thus the predictive power of models trained only on synthetic spectra.
The consistently highest performing models are from the convolution family of TSER algorithms. MultiROCKET-Hydra was one of the most accurate classifiers in a previous comparison in Ref.
[
39
]
of 40 time-series algorithms, and was almost 200 times faster to train than its comparably-accurate competition. This supports the hypothesis that training on power spectra from particle-in-cell codes is a suitable application for the time-series approach and bears similarity to standard time series classification benchmarks. Many of the regression algorithms in Aeon were adapted from classification variants
[
38
]
. Hydra and the ROCKET-derivatives are recommended for generalisation.
Several caveats apply to these results. The periodic simulation domain implies a homogeneous, infinite 1D plasma without source or sink effects, complex geometry, spatially-varying background electromagnetic fields or mode conversion. 2D effects were incorporated by combining spectra from four angles near perpendicular, but given the qualitative differences observed even in these spectra separated by
2
∘
2^{\circ}
, there is likely to be additional phenomena observed in spectra from diverse emission locations and subsequent propagation, attenuation and detection. Experimental spectra are likely to contain peaks affected by Doppler shifts
[
25
]
, doublet-splitting
[
10
]
and nonlinearities. These physical effects increase the complexity and fine structure of the spectra that arise from small differences in parameters that can be disambiguated by TSER algorithms.
Regardless, Aeon’s algorithms’ success at predicting parameters based on an experimental spectrum, with all the real world physics it contains, having been trained only on simulated analogues is a credit to the robustness of the approach. A total data corpus of 110 simulations is small in machine learning terms for scanning four parameters simultaneously. The non-trivial inversion of this problem is made challenging by the covariance of ICE spectral characteristics with the various input parameters, which could be mitigated by increasing the dataset size and restricting the parameters to physically accessible regions of phase space. Improvements to a diagnostically-relevant ICE model could be achieved by: running fully kinetic 2D simulations in a restricted parameter space tailored to a particular device; increasing the training size as much as computational resources allow while scanning additional variables known to impact ICE such as temperature and
v
⟂
/
v
Alfv
​
e
´
​
n
v_{\perp}/v_{\mathrm{Alfv\acute{e}n}}
[
42
]
; adding tritium to the background species; varying the background electron and fuel ion temperatures, potentially independently; and using a dynamic temporal simulation length to ensure the MCI fully saturates in all cases. It should also be noted that these particular plasma parameters considered herein were chosen based on both their operational usefulness and qualitative estimations of their likelihood to influence the MCI. In particular, if other information can disambiguate the up-down symmetry in a tokamak,
B
0
B_{0}
and density information can spatially localise the point of emission. There may be many other quantities encoded in ICE spectra recoverable through this workflow.
By combining machine learning and first-principles nonlinear kinetic plasma physics, this letter describes the creation of a control room-ready tool enabling the inference of bulk and fast ion plasma parameters from experimental ICE spectra for the first time. We ran 110 plasma parameter sets of nonlinear 1D3V fully-kinetic PIC simulations at four propagations angles near perpendicular to
B
0
B_{0}
to build linear-in-2D composite spectra. These simulations comprise fusion alpha-particles in the drifting “ring-beam” class of distribution function with thermal fuel deuterons and electrons, a scenario known to produce spectra characteristic of ICE. This took only 1.5 million CPU hours, which enables most labs to generate comparable training sets and build similar inference models for their devices. TSER models were trained in a novel plasma physics context to predict
B
0
B_{0}
strength (peak LOOCV
R
2
=
0.99
R^{2}=0.99
), electron density (
R
2
=
0.82
R^{2}=0.82
) and alpha-particle velocity pitch (
R
2
=
0.66
R^{2}=0.66
) and concentration (
R
2
=
0.90
R^{2}=0.90
) from synthetic
δ
​
B
z
\delta B_{z}
,
δ
​
E
x
\delta E_{x}
and
δ
​
E
y
\delta E_{y}
frequency spectra derived from simulations. Comparison to a gold-standard JET ICE spectrum from Cottrell et al.
[
12
]
required only one log-scale
δ
​
B
z
\delta B_{z}
spectrum truncated in frequency to
187
187
MHz, well below today’s diagnostic bandwidth capability. Despite these obstacles, the best performing algorithms were able to, based on the experimental spectrum only, predict the emitting plasma’s
B
0
B_{0}
to within 2%, alpha velocity pitch to within 5% and density to within 1%. Without performance optimisation and with the largest training sets, the inference time for the best performing models (Hydra, MultiROCKET-Hydra) is around 100ms, making this approach suitable for inter-shot analysis of ICE spectra given a pre-trained prediction model. With conceivable performance optimisations, it could be extended to real-time control applications for the next generation of fusion power plants.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded jointly by the UK Atomic Energy Authority and as part of the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Fusion Energy Science and Technology (Fusion Power CDT) with project reference EP/S022430/1. EPOCH was in part funded by the EPSRC grants EP/G054950/1, EP/G056803/1, EP/G055165/1, EP/ M022463/1 and EP/P02212X/1. This work used the ARCHER2 UK National Supercomputing Service (
https://www.archer2.ac.uk
) through EPSRC grant EP/X035336/1. The Viking cluster was also used during this project, which is a high performance compute facility provided by the University of York. We are grateful for computational support from the University of York, IT Services and the Research IT team.
Data Availability
This work used EPOCH1D version 4.19.6 (commit
f42ebadc
) available at
https://github.com/epochpic/epoch/tree/5.0-devel
. Relevant analysis code and data can be accessed at
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20122434
.
References
[1]
T. D. Arber, K. Bennett, C. S. Brady, A. Lawrence-Douglas, M. G. Ramsay, N. J. Sircombe, P. Gillies, R. G. Evans, H. Schmitz, A. R. Bell, and C. P. Ridgers
(2015-11)
Contemporary particle-in-cell approach to laser-plasma modelling
.
Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion
57
(
11
),
pp. 1–26
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[2]
L. Askinazi, A. Belokurov, D. Gin, V. Kornev, S. Lebedev, A. Shevelev, A. Tukachinsky, and N. Zhubr
(2018)
Ion cyclotron emission in nbi-heated plasmas in the tuman-3m tokamak
.
Nuclear Fusion
58
(
8
),
pp. 082003
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[3]
A. Bagnall, M. Middlehurst, G. Forestier, A. Ismail-Fawaz, A. Guillaume, D. Guijo-Rubio, C. W. Tan, A. Dempster, and G. I. Webb
(2024)
A hands-on introduction to time series classification and regression
.
In
Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
,
pp. 6410–6411
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[4]
G. Beckett, J. Beech-Brandt, K. Leach, Z. Payne, A. Simpson, L. Smith, A. Turner, and A. Whiting
(2024-12)
ARCHER2 service description
.
Zenodo
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[5]
C. K. Birdsall and A. B. Langdon
(1991)
Plasma physics via computer simulation
.
CRC Press
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[6]
L. Carbajal, R. O. Dendy, S. C. Chapman, and J. W. S. Cook
(2014)
Linear and nonlinear physics of the magnetoacoustic cyclotron instability of fusion-born ions in relation to ion cyclotron emission
.
Physics of Plasmas
21
(
1
).
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[7]
B. Chapman, R. O. Dendy, S. C. Chapman, L. A. Holland, S. W. A. Irvine, and B. C. G. Reman
(2020)
Comparing theory and simulation of ion cyclotron emission from energetic ion populations with spherical shell and ring-beam distributions in velocity-space
.
Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion
62
(
5
),
pp. 055003
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[8]
B. Chapman, R. O. Dendy, S. C. Chapman, K. G. McClements, and R. Ochoukov
(2020)
Origin of ion cyclotron emission at the proton cyclotron frequency from the core of deuterium plasmas in the asdex-upgrade tokamak
.
Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion
62
(
9
),
pp. 095022
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[9]
B. Chapman, R. O. Dendy, S. C. Chapman, K. G. McClements, G. S. Yun, S. G. Thatipamula, and M. Kim
(2018)
Nonlinear wave interactions generate high-harmonic cyclotron emission from fusion-born protons during a kstar elm crash
.
Nuclear Fusion
58
(
9
),
pp. 096027
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[10]
J. W. S. Cook
(2022)
Doublet splitting of fusion alpha particle driven ion cyclotron emission
.
Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion
64
(
11
),
pp. 115002
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[11]
J. W. S. Cook, R. O. Dendy, and S. C. Chapman
(2013)
Particle-in-cell simulations of the magnetoacoustic cyclotron instability of fusion-born alpha-particles in tokamak plasmas
.
Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion
55
(
6
),
pp. 065003
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[12]
G. A. Cottrell, V. P. Bhatnagar, O. Da Costa, R. O. Dendy, J. Jacquinot, K. G. McClements, D. C. McCune, M. F. F. Nave, P. Smeulders, and D. F. H. Start
(1993)
Ion cyclotron emission measurements during jet deuterium-tritium experiments
.
Nuclear Fusion
33
(
9
),
pp. 1365
.
Cited by:
Figure 4
,
Figure 4
,
Table 4
,
Table 4
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[13]
G. Cottrell and R. Dendy
(1988)
Superthermal radiation from fusion products in jet
.
Physical review letters
60
(
1
),
pp. 33
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[14]
A. Dempster, D. F. Schmidt, and G. I. Webb
(2021)
Minirocket: a very fast (almost) deterministic transform for time series classification
.
In
Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery & data mining
,
pp. 248–257
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[15]
A. Dempster, D. F. Schmidt, and G. I. Webb
(2024)
Quant: a minimalist interval method for time series classification
.
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery
38
(
4
),
pp. 2377–2402
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[16]
A. Dempster, D. F. Schmidt, and G. I. Webb
(2022)
HYDRA: competing convolutional kernels for fast and accurate time series classification
.
External Links:
2203.13652
,
Link
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[17]
R. O. Dendy, B. Chapman-Oplopoiou, B. C. G. Reman, and J. W. S. Cook
(2023)
Mechanism for collective energy transfer from neutral beam-injected ions to fusion-born alpha particles on cyclotron timescales in a plasma
.
Physical Review Letters
130
(
10
),
pp. 105102
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[18]
R. O. Dendy, K. G. McClements, C. Lashmore-Davies, G. Cottrell, R. Majeski, and S. Cauffman
(1995)
Ion cyclotron emission due to collective instability of fusion products and beam ions in tftr and jet
.
Nuclear fusion
35
(
12
),
pp. 1733
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[19]
R. Dendy, C. N. Lashmore-Davies, and K. Kam
(1992)
A possible excitation mechanism for observed superthermal ion cyclotron emission from tokamak plasmas
.
Physics of Fluids B: Plasma Physics
4
(
12
),
pp. 3996–4006
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[20]
R. Dendy and K. McClements
(2015)
Ion cyclotron emission from fusion-born ions in large tokamak plasmas: a brief review from jet and tftr to iter
.
Plasma Physics and controlled fusion
57
(
4
),
pp. 044002
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[21]
H. Deng, G. Runger, E. Tuv, and M. Vladimir
(2013)
A time series forest for classification and feature extraction
.
Information Sciences
239
,
pp. 142–153
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[22]
T. Fulop, Y. I. Kolesnichenko, M. Lisak, and D. Anderson
(1997)
Origin of superthermal ion cyclotron emission in tokamaks
.
Nuclear fusion
37
(
9
),
pp. 1281–1293
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[23]
T. Fülöp and M. Lisak
(1998)
Ion cyclotron emission from fusion products and beam ions in the tokamak fusion test reactor
.
Nuclear fusion
38
(
5
),
pp. 761–773
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[24]
N. N. Gorelenkov
(2016)
Ion cyclotron emission studies: retrospects and prospects
.
Plasma Physics Reports
42
(
5
),
pp. 430–439
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[25]
N. Gorelenkov and C. Cheng
(1995)
Alfvén cyclotron instability and ion cyclotron emission
.
Nuclear fusion
35
(
12
),
pp. 1743–1752
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[26]
C. Gormezano, C. Challis, E. Joffrin, X. Litaudon, and A. Sips
(2008)
Chapter 4: advanced tokamak scenario development at jet
.
Fusion science and technology
53
(
4
),
pp. 958–988
.
Cited by:
Table 1
,
Table 1
.
[27]
D. Guijo-Rubio, M. Middlehurst, G. Arcencio, D. F. Silva, and A. Bagnall
(2024)
Unsupervised feature based algorithms for time series extrinsic regression
.
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery
38
(
4
),
pp. 2141–2185
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[28]
A. Guillaume, C. Vrain, and W. Elloumi
(2022)
Random dilated shapelet transform: a new approach for time series shapelets
.
In
International Conference on Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence
,
pp. 653–664
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[29]
R. W. Hockney and J. W. Eastwood
(1988)
Computer simulation using particles
.
CRC Press
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[30]
E. Lanti, N. Ohana, N. Tronko, T. Hayward-Schneider, A. Bottino, B. F. McMillan, A. Mishchenko, A. Scheinberg, A. Biancalani, P. Angelino,
et al.
(2020)
ORB5: a global electromagnetic gyrokinetic code using the pic approach in toroidal geometry
.
Computer Physics Communications
251
,
pp. 107072
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[31]
J. Lines, S. Taylor, and A. Bagnall
(2018)
Time series classification with hive-cote: the hierarchical vote collective of transformation-based ensembles
.
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD)
12
(
5
),
pp. 1–35
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[32]
L. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhu, C. Qin, Y. Zhao, S. Yuan, Y. Mao, M. Li, K. Zhang, J. Cheng,
et al.
(2020)
Ion cyclotron emission driven by deuterium neutral beam injection and core fusion reaction ions in east
.
Nuclear Fusion
60
(
4
),
pp. 044002
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[33]
C. H. Lubba, S. S. Sethi, P. Knaute, S. R. Schultz, B. D. Fulcher, and N. S. Jones
(2019)
Catch22: canonical time-series characteristics: selected through highly comparative time-series analysis
.
Data mining and knowledge discovery
33
(
6
),
pp. 1821–1852
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[34]
K. G. McClements, A. Brisset, B. Chapman, S. C. Chapman, R. O. Dendy, P. Jacquet, V. G. Kiptily, M. Mantsinen, B. C. G. Reman, and J. Contributors
(2018)
Observations and modelling of ion cyclotron emission observed in jet plasmas using a sub-harmonic arc detection system during ion cyclotron resonance heating
.
Nuclear Fusion
58
(
9
),
pp. 096020
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[35]
K. G. McClements, R. O. Dendy, C. N. Lashmore-Davies, G. A. Cottrell, S. Cauffman, and R. Majeski
(1996)
Interpretation of ion cyclotron emission from sub-alfvénic fusion products in the tokamak fusion test reactor
.
Physics of Plasmas
3
(
2
),
pp. 543–553
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[36]
K. McClements, R. D’Inca, R. Dendy, L. Carbajal, S. C. Chapman, J. W. S. Cook, R. Harvey, W. Heidbrink, and S. D. Pinches
(2015)
Fast particle-driven ion cyclotron emission (ice) in tokamak plasmas and the case for an ice diagnostic in iter
.
Nuclear Fusion
55
(
4
),
pp. 043013
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[37]
M. Middlehurst and A. Bagnall
(2023)
Extracting features from random subseries: a hybrid pipeline for time series classification and extrinsic regression
.
In
International Workshop on Advanced Analytics and Learning on Temporal Data
,
pp. 113–126
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[38]
M. Middlehurst, A. Ismail-Fawaz, A. Guillaume, C. Holder, D. Guijo-Rubio, G. Bulatova, L. Tsaprounis, L. Mentel, M. Walter, P. Schäfer, and A. Bagnall
(2024)
Aeon: a python toolkit for learning from time series
.
Journal of Machine Learning Research
25
(
289
),
pp. 1–10
.
External Links:
Link
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[39]
M. Middlehurst, P. Schäfer, and A. Bagnall
(2024)
Bake off redux: a review and experimental evaluation of recent time series classification algorithms
.
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery
38
(
4
),
pp. 1958–2031
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[40]
R. Ochoukov, V. Bobkov, B. Chapman, R. Dendy, M. Dunne, H. Faugel, M. García-Muñoz, B. Geiger, P. Hennequin, K. McClements,
et al.
(2018)
Observations of core ion cyclotron emission on asdex upgrade tokamak
.
Review of Scientific Instruments
89
(
10
).
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[41]
R. Ochoukov, K. McClements, R. Bilato, V. Bobkov, B. Chapman, S. Chapman, R. Dendy, M. Dreval, H. Faugel, J. Noterdaeme,
et al.
(2019)
Interpretation of core ion cyclotron emission driven by sub-alfvénic beam-injected ions via magnetoacoustic cyclotron instability
.
Nuclear Fusion
59
(
8
),
pp. 086032
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[42]
B. C. G. Reman, R. O. Dendy, T. Akiyama, S. C. Chapman, J. W. S. Cook, H. Igami, S. Inagaki, K. Saito, and G. Yun
(2019)
Interpreting observations of ion cyclotron emission from large helical device plasmas with beam-injected ion populations
.
Nuclear Fusion
59
(
9
),
pp. 096013
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[43]
S. Sato, M. Ichimura, Y. Yamaguchi, M. Katano, Y. Imai, T. Murakami, Y. Miyake, T. Yokoyama, S. Moriyama, T. Kobayashi,
et al.
(2010)
Observation of ion cyclotron emission owing to dd fusion product h ions in jt-60u
.
Plasma and Fusion Research
5
,
pp. S2067–S2067
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[44]
A. C. C. Sips, for the Steady State Operation, and the Transport Physics topical groups of the International Tokamak Physics Activity
(2005-04)
Advanced scenarios for iter operation
.
Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion
47
(
5A
),
pp. A19
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
Table 1
,
Table 1
.
[45]
T. W. Slade-Harajda, S. C. Chapman, and R. O. Dendy
(2024)
The consequences of tritium mix for simulated ion cyclotron emission spectra from deuterium-tritium plasmas
.
Nuclear Fusion
64
(
12
),
pp. 126051
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[46]
T. W. Slade-Harajda, J. W. S. Cook, R. O. Dendy, and S. C. Chapman
(2025)
Effects of deuterium-tritium mix on linear growth rates of the magnetoacoustic cyclotron instability in fusion plasmas
.
Physics of Plasmas
32
(
8
).
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[47]
C. W. Tan, C. Bergmeir, F. Petitjean, and G. I. Webb
(2021)
Time series extrinsic regression: predicting numeric values from time series data
.
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery
35
(
3
),
pp. 1032–1060
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
,
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[48]
C. W. Tan, A. Dempster, C. Bergmeir, and G. I. Webb
(2021)
MultiRocket: multiple pooling operators and transformations for fast and effective time series classification
.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.00457
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[49]
E. Tholerus, F.J. Casson, S.P. Marsden, T. Wilson, D. Brunetti, P. Fox, S.J. Freethy, T.C. Hender, S.S. Henderson, A. Hudoba, K.K. Kirov, F. Koechl, H. Meyer, S.I. Muldrew, C. Olde, B.S. Patel, C.M. Roach, S. Saarelma, G. Xia, and the STEP team
(2024-08)
Flat-top plasma operational space of the step power plant
.
Nuclear Fusion
64
(
10
),
pp. 106030
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
Table 1
,
Table 1
.
[50]
K. E. Thome, D. C. Pace, R. I. Pinsker, M. A. Van Zeeland, W. W. Heidbrink, and M. E. Austin
(2019)
Central ion cyclotron emission in the diii-d tokamak
.
Nuclear Fusion
59
(
8
),
pp. 086011
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[51]
T. Todd
(2014)
Diagnostic systems in demo: engineering design issues
.
In
AIP Conference Proceedings
,
Vol.
1612
,
pp. 9–16
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
[52]
M. Wang, C. Wan, J. Lu, Z. Yu, B. Xiao, Y. Li, X. He, Z. Luo, Q. Yuan, Y. Hu,
et al.
(2025)
Time series extrinsic regression for reconstructing missing electron temperature in tokamak
.
Nuclear Fusion
65
(
7
),
pp. 076008
.
Cited by:
Time Series Extrinsic Regression of Ion Cyclotron Emission Spectra Trained on Particle-In-Cell Simulations
.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA