Real-world and simulated thermal data from 960 residential multi-zone buildings in Central Europe
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
1
Background & Summary
2
Methods
2.1
Real-world measurements
2.2
Simulation study
2.2.1
Building properties
Size
Building age
Thermal mass
Window glazing
Number of rooms
Orientation
2.2.2
Occupancy
Occupancy profiles
Temperature setpoints and night setback
Ventilation
2.2.3
Building service equipment
2.2.4
Weather
3
Data Records
3.1
File naming convention
3.2
Included measurements
4
Technical Validation
4.1
Sensor validation for real-world data
4.2
Comparison of simulation model to TwinHouses
4.3
Plausibility checks for the simulation study
5
Usage Notes
6
Data Availability
7
Code Availability
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2606.01994v1 [cs.DB] 01 Jun 2026
Real-world and simulated thermal data from 960 residential multi-zone buildings in Central Europe
Fabian Raisch
Technical University of Applied Sciences Rosenheim
Technical University of Munich
Corresponding author:
fabian.raisch@th-rosenheim.de
Matthias Kersken
Fraunhofer Institute for Building Physics IBP
Markus Male
iDM Energy Systems
Benjamin Tischler
Technical University of Applied Sciences Rosenheim
(
June 1, 2026
)
Abstract
This paper presents the ThermBuild dataset, which comprises real-world measurements from two single-family homes and simulations of 958 TRNSYS building models. The buildings cover diverse combinations of air-source heat pump systems, numbers of thermal zones, occupancy profiles, building ages, thermal masses, sizes, orientations, window glazings, five European climates, and ventilation configurations. The dataset contains 15-minute-resolution operational data spanning 15 months for the real-world buildings and 3 years for the simulated buildings. Each building time series includes detailed measurements of heat pump operation, the heating distribution system, the domestic hot water system, weather conditions, and zone-level indoor climate variables.
The ThermBuild dataset is designed for data-driven thermal dynamics modeling, thereby supporting the deployment of energy-efficient control, as well as fault detection and diagnosis in buildings. It is particularly suited for transfer learning, generalization modeling, benchmarking, simulation-to-reality transfer, and reproducible thermal modeling research.
1
Background & Summary
Building operations account for approximately 30% of global energy consumption and 26% of global greenhouse gas emissions
1
. The building sector is therefore widely recognized as a key domain for reducing energy demand to achieve climate targets. At the same time, building operations offer significant opportunities for emissions reduction. Strategies such as automated fault detection and diagnosis (FDD)
2
and energy-efficient control approaches via model predictive control (MPC)
3
and reinforcement learning (RL)
4
have demonstrated the potential to significantly reduce building energy usage, related emissions, and operational costs.
The deployment of these methods mostly requires accurate models of building thermal dynamics and HVAC operation. One approach is the use of manually calibrated white-box models. However, their development requires expert knowledge, extensive engineering effort, and significant calibration time
3
. Data-driven gray-box and black-box models provide a more scalable alternative because they can be generated directly from measurement data.
Despite these opportunities, most buildings worldwide are not equipped with sensors, limiting the potential for advanced operational methods. Accordingly, when FDD or advanced control systems are deployed in practice, historical data for the specific target building are often unavailable, which delays model generation and algorithm deployment. Publicly available datasets can help address this challenge by enabling the pretraining of models and policies prior to deployment, as demonstrated in recent studies
5
;
6
;
7
;
8
;
9
;
10
;
11
. Once trained, these models can be adapted to unseen target buildings, reducing implementation time and improving early-stage performance, a process well known as transfer learning. Effective pretraining and robust model evaluation require datasets that span a wide range of building characteristics, system configurations, occupant behaviors, and climatic conditions
5
;
12
;
8
.
Access to datasets spanning diverse building types is, therefore, essential for transfer learning. Yet, most transfer learning studies in the building domain have evaluated their methods only on synthetic single-zone target buildings. Publicly available datasets that combine simulated and real-world measurements of multi-zone buildings are therefore important for investigating the applicability of transfer learning methods under real operating conditions and for analyzing the simulation-to-reality transfer performance.
In addition, publicly available datasets support reproducible research and benchmarking for transfer learning and other data-driven methods.
For these reasons, we developed the
ThermBuild
dataset, which complements measurements from two real-world buildings with data from 958 simulated buildings. The real-world data originates from a 15-month measurement campaign conducted in the two TwinHouse reality labs in Holzkirchen, Germany, as used in
13
;
14
.
The simulated data is generated from a validated TRNSYS simulation environment and provides 3 years of data for each building. The entire dataset represents multi-zone single-family houses located in Central Europe, constructed between 1980 and today. The buildings cover variations in weather, occupancy, building properties, and two heat pump configurations. Building properties are represented by different building ages, thermal masses, window glazings, orientations, sizes, and numbers of zones. Occupancy affects internal heat gains, domestic hot water (DHW) draw-offs, and different air-changing rates via natural or mechanical ventilation. Both simulated and measured data are provided at 15-minute resolution and cover heating and cooling periods. Each time series includes room-level indoor climate measurements, weather conditions, and detailed operational data from the heat pump, heating distribution including thermal storage, and DHW.
The dataset contains all variables required to model the thermal dynamics of both the building envelope and the heating and cooling system. These thermal models can subsequently be used for energy-efficient heat pump and zone-level control, as well as fault detection and diagnosis. The dataset is designed to promote research on multi-zone thermal modeling, transfer learning, model and policy generalization, and the simulation-to-reality transfer challenge. For these domains, the dataset supports benchmarking and reproducibility research. Beyond thermal modeling, the dataset can be used for a broad range of related applications, including electrical and thermal load forecasting, heat pump performance analysis, and thermal energy storage modeling.
Several other building datasets exist, such as the Building Data Genome Project
15
and BuildingBench
16
, which provide large-scale electricity load data with associated metadata. These datasets focus primarily on the electrical side of the building and provide limited insight into thermal dynamics and heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC) behavior.
Few datasets target the thermal side of residential buildings. The ecobee dataset
17
provides thermostat data from around 1,000 homes but lacks detailed HVAC measurements and multi-zone observations. The HOT dataset
18
scales to approximately 150,000 synthetic homes, yet does not represent real-world operation or detailed HVAC time series. The IDEAL household energy dataset
19
includes electricity, gas, and multi-zone sensing for 255 homes, offering richer heating-related context, although the time series have inconsistent measurements (only 32 out of the 255 homes include indoor temperatures and radiator flow temperatures), weather data is missing, and no heat pump systems are included.
2
Methods
The ThermBuild dataset consists of two complementary parts. The first part, further described in Section
2.1
, contains real-world measurement data collected from two residential buildings equipped with different air-source heat pump systems. The second part, further described in Section
2.2
, contains simulated data generated using the TRNSYS 18 thermal-energetic building simulation software
20
. This component provides three years of time-series data for 958 simulated buildings derived from variations of the real-world buildings.
2.1
Real-world measurements
The real-world measurements were conducted from 7
th
February 2025 to 30
th
April 2026 in two residential test buildings, referred to as the TwinHouses. The TwinHouses have previously been used in several scientific studies, including the validation of building energy simulation tools within the framework of IEA EBC Annex 58
13
and Annex 71
14
. Figure
1(b)
shows the test site including the two TwinHouses and the institute’s weather station. The eastern house is called TwinHouse N2 (see Figure
1(b)
), and the western TwinHouse O5. The buildings have been set up as two identical detached single-family houses at the Fraunhofer Institute for Building Physics IBP near Holzkirchen, south of Munich, Germany. Each building comprises a living space of 140 m², which corresponds to the German average for single-family homes. The TwinHouses were constructed around 1980 and have been retrofitted continuously to meet modern thermal requirements. Currently, the thermal status meets the requirements for a newly refurbished building according to the German building energy code (GEG 2020)
21
. Both houses are equipped with standard triple-pane insulating glazing and comprise seven common rooms. The basements were excluded from the investigation and maintained at a constant temperature of 18 °C by a separate heating system. The buildings experience only negligible external shading and share the same orientation, with the living room facing south.
(a)
Aerial view from the south of the two TwinHouses (right) and the weather station (left) marked in yellow.
(b)
West view of the N2 TwinHouse, including the outside unit of the iDM heat pump.
Figure 1
:
Fraunhofer IBP TwinHouse test site near Holzkirchen (Germany) and installed heat pump system.
Figure
2
provides the TwinHouses’ floor plan and the setup of the mechanical ventilation system. As indicated, the doors from the corridor to the sleeping room and to the bathroom are closed, as is the trapdoor between the ground floor and the attic. Figure
2
also shows the supply and extract air points of the mechanical ventilation system. Dining, sleeping, and the living room are supply air rooms, while the kitchen and bath have extract air points. The two child rooms in the attic have balanced supply and extract air.
Figure 2
:
Floor plan of the ground floor (left) and the attic (right) of the TwinHouses, including the indication of open/sealed doors and the supply and extract air positions.
The two TwinHouses differ in their building service equipment (BSE) configurations. TwinHouse O5 is equipped with a compact heat pump system featuring only minimal thermal storage capacity, which is primarily required for heat pump defrost operation. The system, therefore, supplies the heating distribution system almost directly. This configuration is referred to as
BSE1
and is illustrated in Figure
3(a)
. BSE1 does not include DHW production.
TwinHouse N2 is equipped with a heat pump system comprising a wall-mounted indoor unit, an 825 L DHW storage, and a 500 L heating buffer. DHW production is additionally supported by a solar thermal collector with an area of approximately 6 m². Domestic hot water is drawn from the storage tank according to a predefined occupancy-based tapping profile. This configuration is referred to as
BSE2
and is illustrated in Figure
3(b)
. Together, BSE1 and BSE2 represent direct-coupled and storage-coupled heat pump systems, resulting in distinct thermal dynamics.
Both TwinHouses use identical outdoor units for the air-source heat pumps, as shown for TwinHouse N2 in Figure
1(b)
. In both buildings, heating and cooling are distributed through underfloor heating systems, consisting of wet-screed underfloor heating on the ground floor and dry-screed underfloor heating in the attic.
(a)
BSE1: iDM iPump compact unit in the O5 basement, including a 50 L heating buffer for the defrost cycles (integrated DHW buffer was not used).
(b)
BSE2: iDM Alm consisting of wall-mounted indoor unit, DHW solar storage tank, including fresh water station and heating buffer (left to right) in N2 basement.
Figure 3
:
Building service equipment installation.
The TwinHouses include room-wise electrical power-controlled internal heat gain simulators with a convective-radiative split of approximately 50% to mimic occupancy. For the occupancy profiles, we used the Occdem software
22
. Further information on software usage and occupancy will be provided in Section
2.2.2
. The set-point temperatures in both houses are 20 °C for all rooms with no night setback. The ventilation is mechanical with a building-wide volume flow rate of 155 m
3
/h
21
.
The data acquisition systems consisted of the Beckhoff PLC of the TwinHouses with a 1-second sampling interval and the internal logging system of the iDM heat pumps. When measurements were available from both systems, the TwinHouses data were preferred because the instrumentation was calibrated prior to the experiment. Due to various technical issues, the raw data contains gaps in one or both systems. When data were available from the complementary iDM acquisition system, the missing values were replaced accordingly. If gaps persisted in both systems, a k-nearest-neighbor (kNN) method with a neighborhood size of 5 was applied for imputation. The datasets before and after imputation are provided separately. Additional details on the kNN implementation are presented in Section
7
.
2.2
Simulation study
The aim of the simulation study is to complement the TwinHouses measurement data with synthetic data. To this end, the TwinHouses were modeled in the TRNSYS simulation environment to establish two baseline models. Variations of these two baselines were generated across three domains: building properties, occupancy, and weather conditions. Each domain comprises multiple systematically varied sub-parameters, as illustrated in Figure
4
. These parameters were selected because they most strongly influence the thermal dynamic behavior of buildings
23
. Sections
2.2.1
to
2.2.4
describe all variations in detail. The parameter variations were divided into systematic variations and random selection. Systematic variations were generated by combining all possible parameter variations of 2 ventilation types, 5 locations, 3 building sizes, 3 building ages, 3 thermal mass categories, 2 window glazing types, and 2 BSE configurations derived from the baseline TwinHouses.
This process resulted in 1,080 unique building configurations. In addition, each configuration was assigned a set of randomly selected parameters, including temperature setpoints, occupancy profiles, building orientation, and the number of rooms.
Based on these configurations, 1,080 TRNSYS models were automatically generated from the two baselines. Due to the automated model generation process, some simulation cases failed to meet the predefined convergence criteria and were therefore discarded.
The convergence tolerance was set to 0.1%, defining the maximum allowed deviation between successive iteration steps for each 5-minute simulation timestep. Up to 400 iterations were permitted per timestep, and simulations were discarded if more than 300 timesteps (0.3%) failed to converge.
The final dataset consequently contains 958 successful simulation runs with a total computation time of about 8.5 days.
The simulated dataset was generated at a 15-minute temporal resolution to maintain consistency with the real-world measurements. To improve numerical stability, the TRNSYS simulations were performed with a 5-minute timestep and subsequently aggregated to 15-minute mean values.
In the following, all parameter variations of the simulation study are explained.
Figure 4
:
Overview of the simulation study variations. A total of 1,080 systematic building configurations were generated, while parameters marked as random selection were assigned individually for each simulation case.
2.2.1
Building properties
The varied building properties include building size, building age, thermal mass, window glazing, number of rooms, and orientation.
Size
The size of the building influences the amount of energy required for heating. To capture the influence of building size, the floor area of the baseline models is scaled to 80% and 120%. The TwinHouses living space area (140 m²) is defined as 100% because it represents the average German single-family house. The surface areas of the walls, roof, windows, and internal components (incl. underfloor heating) are adjusted accordingly.
Building age
The thermal performance of a building is strongly influenced by the thermal resistance of its envelope, which is closely related to the construction period and prevailing building standards at the time of construction
24
. To represent this variation in the simulation study, three different building ages are chosen. Besides the current energetic quality of the TwinHouses, year 2020, building ages according to the year 1980 and 2000 are chosen. Table
1
lists the U-values of the envelope’s main components according to the chosen ages. The 2020 U-values are defined by TwinHouses’ current constructions. For the other two construction ages, these properties are taken from the "announcement of the rules for data collection and data use in existing residential buildings" of the German federal ministries for economic affairs and energy, and the federal ministry of the interior, building, and community
25
. The U-values are provided in Table
1
for each year.
Table 1
:
Envelope U-values and glazing g-values of the TwinHouses (2020) and the simulation study for different building ages. The envelope mean was calculated based on the area-weighted U-values of all envelope components.
U-value [W/(m²K)]
g-value [-] of glazing
age
envelope mean
external wall
window (incl. frame)
roof
cellar ceiling
standard
solar protection
2020
0.27
0.19
1.00
0.22
0.29
0.50
0.20
2000
0.54
0.50
1.90
0.30
0.60
0.70
0.33
1980
0.94
0.80
3.00
0.70
0.80
0.64
0.44
Thermal mass
The thermal mass of a building influences its heat storage capacity and thermal inertia. The TwinHouses consist of external and ground floor internal walls of 1970 (800 kg/m³) honeycomb bricks, concrete ceilings, and a gypsum board-covered roof truss and internal attic walls. In addition, four concrete pillars on the ground floor support the ceiling structure. Overall, the buildings correspond to a heavy-weight construction, although the attic has a lower thermal mass. Since the TwinHouses serve as the basis for the simulation model, this configuration is defined as the “heavy” case.
The simulation models were further modified to represent medium and light thermal mass variants. For the medium-weight case, the ground-floor internal walls were replaced with drywall constructions, and the four concrete pillars were removed. For the lightweight case, the ground-floor screed was replaced by a dry screed system, and the density of the perforated clay bricks was reduced to represent a construction with larger cavities. In addition, the density of the attic dry screed was reduced.
Window glazing
We vary the windows’ glazing from standard multi-pane products to solar protection glazing to mimic different levels of solar gain. This can similarly be interpreted as different window sizes. The amount of solar short-wave radiation energy penetrating through a glazing is described by the solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC) or the total energy transmission (g-value). Solar protection glazings have lower g-values than standard glazings while maintaining comparable U-values. It must be noted that the U-value of the glazings, which varies with building age, also influences the g-value. So the g-value changes with the usage of solar protection glazing and with building age. The g-values of the chosen glazings are included in Table
1
.
Number of rooms
The TwinHouses feature seven common rooms, in addition to the unheated rooms, i.e., doorway, corridor, and staircase. To represent different internal room layouts in the dataset, variations with six and five common rooms are created by merging two and three ground-floor rooms in the simulation model. For a six-room house, the kitchen and living room are merged (see Figure
2
). The authors are aware that a merge of the kitchen and dining room would be more typical, but the TwinHouses’ ground floor plan doesn’t allow for this option. For a five-room layout, the kitchen, living, and dining are merged.
Orientation
The building orientation determines which rooms receive solar gains from incident solar radiation. In the simulation study, the building’s orientation is rotated. The rotation is randomly chosen for each case between 0° and 315° in 45°-steps. An orientation of 0° corresponds to the as-built TwinHouses configuration, with the living room facing south; 90°, 180°, and 270° correspond to east-, north-, and west-facing living rooms, respectively.
2.2.2
Occupancy
In this section, we explain all factors influenced by occupancy, i.e., occupancy itself, temperature setpoints, and ventilation.
Occupancy profiles
Representative occupant behavior is modeled using the Occdem software
22
, which generates stochastic occupancy profiles describing internal heat gains. Occdem separates these gains into occupant- and appliance-related loads and provides them at room-specific level. The probabilistic formulation ensures variability across both individual profiles and daily patterns throughout the year. As Occdem provides one-year profiles, they are repeated to match the three-year simulation period. The room-specific occupancy schedules are further used to determine the timing of natural ventilation through manual window operation, as described in the paragraph
Ventilation
.
The Occdem profiles are generated at a 10-minute resolution. To match the dataset structure, they are resampled to 30-minute mean values and applied to the 15-minute simulation time step, resulting in occupancy-dependent changes every second time step. For each simulation case, a separate randomly selected occupancy profile is used. Each profile represents a household occupancy of 2 to 4 persons.
Temperature setpoints and night setback
Temperature setpoints are linked to occupancy to reflect occupant-dependent comfort preferences.
For each building simulation, we sample a base set-point temperature of 21 °C with a random offset of
±
\pm
2.5 K (normal distribution), to represent common comfort ranges. For the sleeping room and children’s rooms, this base set-point temperature is reduced by 2
±
\pm
0.5 K to account for lower temperature requirements in infrequently used spaces. For randomly chosen 70% of the simulation cases, we consider an additional night setback of 2
±
\pm
0.5 K of the base set-point temperature to mimic typical residential nighttime operation. The setback period starts at a randomly selected time between 21:30 and 24:00 and ends between 6:00 and 8:30. For bathroom set-point temperatures, the base set-point is increased by 1.5
±
\pm
1.5 K to reflect higher comfort requirements in the bathroom.
The temperature setpoints and the potential night setback remain constant within each simulation case throughout the three-year period.
Ventilation
To capture the influence of air exchange on thermal dynamics, the simulated cases include either mechanical or natural ventilation. For mechanical ventilation, we randomly sample a volume flow rate between 31 and 155 m
3
/h, as the German energy building code
21
defines 155 m
3
/h as the basis for mechanical ventilation calculations. Supply and extract air rooms are defined as shown in Figure
2
. For natural ventilation, window opening times are generated randomly based on the occupancy (see paragraph
Occupancy profiles
). When occupied, all rooms are ventilated twice a day, typically following the first and last period of occupancy. Building airtightness (uncontrolled leakage of air through the building envelope) is maintained constant across ventilation modes and building ages. For both approaches, all resulting airflows between rooms and between indoor and outdoor environments are modeled using the TRNSYS-TRNflow plugin
26
, a multi-zone airflow model based on COMIS
27
.
2.2.3
Building service equipment
The two variants, BSE1 and BSE2, as described in Section
2.1
, were both implemented in the baseline simulation models. In both configurations, the heat pumps provide space heating and cooling, while BSE2 additionally includes DHW. To represent these operating modes, the simulation model includes three separate heat pump models: one for heating, one for cooling, and one for DHW production. This was done, as heating and cooling require different coefficient of performance (COP) values (describes the ratio between the thermal energy provided by the heat pump and the electrical energy consumption), and the hydraulic model is more stable when separated. Only one of the three heat pump models can operate at a time. The heat pump compressor frequency is PID-controlled to maintain the required outlet temperatures at fixed water flow rates. Electric consumption and thermal energy provided to the water circuits are calculated based on the compressor frequency, the heat pump outlet temperature, and the outdoor air temperature using polynomial functions. The polynomial functions were provided by the heat pump’s manufacturer and can not be shared due to proprietary restrictions.
For the BSE2 setup, a DHW buffer is modeled and connected to both the DHW heat pump and the solar collector. The DHW tapping point, including the corresponding cold-water supply, is realized directly at one of the buffer connections. The water flow rate of the DHW tappings is defined by the individual occupancy profiles.
2.2.4
Weather
The weather strongly influences building thermal dynamics through ambient conditions. We consider five different locations in Central Europe for the simulation study to capture a broad range of operating conditions: Holzkirchen (Germany), Bolzano (Italy), Paris (France), Warsaw (Poland), and Copenhagen (Denmark). The locations were selected from cities in Central Europe with a cold-temperate climate according to
28
. In these regions, buildings require heating during winter and may require cooling during summer. For each location, we generate a three-year weather time series using Meteonorm 8
29
. We create three different typical meteorological years with random seeds and concatenate them to obtain a non-repeating three-year climate file for the TRNSYS simulation.
3
Data Records
The real-world and simulated data are provided separately while following a consistent column structure. The simulated dataset replicates the sensor features of the real-world buildings to ensure comparability and support joint analyses. Both datasets include measurements of heat pump operation, the heating distribution system, the DHW system, weather conditions, and zone-level indoor climate variables. Additional information on the included measurements is provided in Section
3.2
. Section
3.1
further describes the metadata and the file naming convention. The published dataset is available at:
http://dx.doi.org/10.24406/fordatis/445
and is organized according to the following folder structure:
•
Measurement data:
–
Raw measurement data (ThermBuild_measure_raw.zip):
This file contains 1.5 years of measurement data recorded in the TwinHouses, including data gaps caused by temporary failures of both acquisition systems. Gaps are marked with NaN.
–
Imputed measurement data (ThermBuild_measure_imputed.zip): This file contains the same data as the previous file, with missing values imputed using the kNN (k = 5) method.
–
Additional temperature measurements ThermBuild_measure_Temp_raw.zip):
This file includes additional air temperature measurements at four heights (10 cm, 110 cm, 170 cm, and 10 cm below the ceiling) as well as the mean radiant temperature derived from a globe thermometer for all common rooms, which are not included in the simulated data.
•
Simulation study (ThermBuild_Sim.zip): This file includes the data of all 958 simulated buildings over the 3-year period.
Each ZIP archive contains the time series data of the corresponding buildings in comma-separated value (CSV) format, with one CSV file provided per building.
3.1
File naming convention
The dataset files follow a strict and descriptive naming convention that encodes all building parameters (metadata) directly in the file name. The file name consists of parameter identifiers (case name), specifying the parameter name, followed by its corresponding values (case id), as summarized in Table
2
.
This structured naming enables direct identification of the files without requiring additional metadata. Table
2
also shows the number of variations in the simulation study per parameter for consistency with Section
2
. The two measurement datasets from the TwinHouses follow the same naming convention but use the suffix “_wetReal” to distinguish them from the synthetic weather files and to indicate real Holzkirchen climate.
Table 2
:
Overview of the file naming convention.
∗
: indicates the parameters of the real-world TwinHouses;
∗∗
: indicates the value of the realized average air change rate (ACR) of the building in [m
3
/h].
Case name
Parameter
Case id
id description
Variations
_BSE
Building service equipment
1
∗
, 2
∗
iDM iPump; iDM ALM
2
_age
Building age
1
∗
, 2, 3
2020;
2000;
1980
3
_SoProt
window glazing type
0
∗
, 1
standard glazing; solar protection glazing (according to building age)
2
_mass
Building thermal mass
lig, mid, hea
∗
light; middle; heavy
3
_wet
Weather
Hoki, Bolz, .., Real
∗
Holzkirchen (DE); Bolzano (I); Paris (F); Warsaw (Po); Copenhagen (DK); real
5
_size
Building size
080, 100
∗
, 120
80%; 100% (orig size); 120%
3
_vent
∗∗
Ventilation
(0, 1
∗
)
Natural ventilation; mechanical ventilation (ACR is selected randomly)
2, random
_setB
Night setback
(0
∗
, 1)
no night setback, incl. night setback
random
_Use
Occupancy profile
(0, ..,1000)
randomly generated using
22
random
_rot
Building orientation
[0
∘
∗
, ..,315
∘
]
defines south-ward orientation
random
_roo
Number of rooms
3
∗
, 2, 1
7 rooms; 6 rooms; 5 rooms
random
3.2
Included measurements
Table
3
summarizes all measurements included in the dataset. For the thermal systems, the dataset provides flow and return temperatures, storage temperatures at multiple locations, thermal power measurements, and mass flow rates. Supply and return temperatures should only be interpreted when the corresponding mass flow rate is greater than zero, as stagnant water gradually approaches the surrounding air temperature. In addition, the dataset includes electrical power consumption of the heat pump and the corresponding compressor frequency. Auxiliary variables, such as timestamps and heat pump operating modes (heating, cooling, and DHW production), are also provided. At the room level, air temperature and relative humidity are measured at a height of 110 cm. Valve positions and window opening states are normalized between 0 and 1, corresponding to fully closed and fully open, respectively. Finally, the dataset includes the weather measurements.
To ensure a consistent data structure across all buildings, all files share the same column layout. Accordingly, buildings with configuration BSE1 also contain columns related to DHW and solar thermal production, although these entries are set to NaN because the corresponding systems are not present. Similarly, for buildings with fewer than 7 rooms, measurements associated with non-existent rooms are represented by NaN values.
Figure
5
illustrates the measurement concept for the buildings and shows the sensor positions from Table
3
. For the BSE1 system, the grey-shaded area can be neglected.
For the real-world BSE1 system, only one heat storage sensor is available due to the small tank volume, and the columns
dist_Tstore_top
,
dist_Tstore_mid
, and
dist_Tstore_bott
therefore contain identical values. The simulated BSE1 cases include all three storage sensor positions; however, meaningful stratification cannot be expected because of the limited storage volume.
Table 3
:
Measurements included in the data files. Measurement names are grouped by system domain: ‘hp‘ (heat pump), ‘dhw‘ (domestic hot water system), ‘dist‘ (heating and cooling distribution system), ‘solar‘ (solar thermal collector), ‘room‘ (room-specific variables), and ‘wea‘ (weather data). Sensor ids refer to the sensor positions shown in Figure
5
. The placeholder ‘roomID‘ represents the individual rooms (e.g., child room, bedroom, bathroom, living room, dining room, or kitchen).
Measurement name
Unit
Description
Sensor id
TIME
h
Simulation time step
consecutive_days
-
n’th day of the dataset
day_of_the_year
-
day of the year
dhw_Tflow_store_tap
°C
DHW draw-off temperature
1
dhw_Tstore_bott
°C
Temperature of the DHW tank
2
dhw_Tstore_mid
°C
Temperature of the DHW tank
2
dhw_Tstore_top
°C
Temperature of the DHW tank
2
dhw_tap_Vset
l/h
Setpoint DHW draw-off volume flow
1
dhw_thP_store_tap
kW
Thermal output of DHW tapping
1
dist_Tflow_store_ufh
°C
Common supply flow temperature of all heating surfaces
3
dist_Tflow_ufh_store
°C
Return temperature of the entire heating circuit
3
dist_Tstore_bott
°C
Temperature of the heating buffer
4
dist_Tstore_mid
°C
Temperature of the heating buffer
4
dist_Tstore_top
°C
Temperature of the heating buffer
4
dist_Vol
kg/h
Mass flow in the heating circuit between heating storage and underfloor heating
3
dist_thP
kW
Thermal output for room heating at the heating buffer outlet
3
hp_elP
kW
Electrical power consumption of the heat pump
5
hp_rps
1/s
Heat pump compressor frequency
5
hp_Tflow_hp_store
°C
Flow temperature from the heat pump to storage
5
hp_Tflow_store_hp
°C
Flow temperature from the storage to the heat pump
5
hp_thP
kW
Thermal power output of the heat pump
5
hp_Vol
kg/h
Mass flow at the heat pump
5
mode_cool
bool
System in cooling mode
5
mode_dhw
bool
Heat pump in DHW preparation
5
mode_heat
bool
System in heating mode
5
roomID_ihs
W
Internal heat source of the room
6
roomID_rh
%
Relative room humidity
6
roomID_Tair
°C
Air temperature
6
roomID_Tret
°C
Return temperature from the room
3
roomID_Tset
°C
Room setpoint temperature
6
roomID_valve
0-1
Heating valve control value
3
roomID_win
0-1
Window opening in the room
6
solar_Tflow_coll_store
°C
Flow temperature from the collector to the DHW buffer
7
solar_Tflow_store_coll
°C
Flow temperature from the DHW buffer to the collector
7
solar_thP
kW
Thermal output of the solar thermal collector
7
wea_IbeamHor
W/m²
Direct solar radiation power on the horizontal plane
wea
wea_IdiffHor
W/m²
Diffuse solar radiation power on the horizontal plane
wea
wea_PercentrH
%
Relative outside air humidity
wea
wea_Tair_out
°C
Outside air temperature
wea
wea_vWind
m/s
Wind speed
wea
wea_Wdir
°
Wind direction (north=0°; east=90°)
wea
Figure 5
:
Schematic representation of the instrumentation concept for the heating case.
4
Technical Validation
We validated the dataset using several methods. Section
4.1
describes the sensor validation of the real-world data. For the simulated data, we follow the recommendations of
30
and applied two validation approaches: (1) comparison of the simulated data with real-world data, as presented in Section
4.2
, and (2) validation using “order-of-magnitude” checks, as described in Section
4.3
.
4.1
Sensor validation for real-world data
Before the measurement campaign started, the sensors were installed following a defined quality assurance procedure. All room air temperature sensors were placed together in a common radiation shield and compared to identify potential measurement deviations. The water temperature sensors were calibrated in the institute’s in-house calibration lab. The installed magneto-inductive mass flow sensors were validated using a calibrated scale by comparing the measured flow rate with the mass of water collected during controlled test runs. The flow meter validation was repeated approximately every 2 months because the hardware occasionally exhibited sensor drift. When drift was detected, the historical measurements were corrected using a linear calibration function, and all flow meters were replaced with manufacturer-calibrated ultrasonic flow meters. The institute’s weather station is subject to a separate quality process. The ventilation airflow meters were sent to a certified calibration lab before the start of the measurements.
In addition to calibrating and testing the sensors’ quality, two acquisition systems were used for HVAC measurement data, as explained in Section
2
.
4.2
Comparison of simulation model to TwinHouses
To validate the TRNSYS simulation model, the measurement data from both TwinHouses were compared with the simulation results. For this comparison, March 11
th
to 25
th
2025, was chosen because this period included a relatively wide range of outdoor air temperatures and solar radiation intensities and was available at the time of the validation. As an example, Figure
6(a)
shows the comparison of simulated (red) and measured (blue) room air temperatures and the cumulated activation time for the valve of the room’s underfloor heating for the O5-iPump building’s dining room. This validation was additionally performed for all remaining rooms and for the N2 building. Figure
6(b)
shows the comparison of the simulated and measured heating energy consumption for the O5 building. After the 15-day validation period in March, the accumulated deviation in thermal energy was 8.5% for the O5 building and 6.9% for the N2 building. These deviations are within the limits proposed by ASHRAE Guideline 14
31
, which allows deviations of up to 10%. The remaining differences between the TRNSYS model and the measured data can be attributed to several factors: (i) model simplifications regarding thermal properties, control strategies, and boundary conditions, (ii) measurement uncertainties from sensor accuracy and positioning, (iii) differences between on-site micro-climatic conditions and the meteorological input data, and (iv) variations in actual infiltration rates compared to model assumptions.
The deviations could potentially be reduced through parameter optimization. However, this step was intentionally omitted because the objective of the dataset is to represent a broader building stock rather than to create a highly tuned digital representation of the TwinHouses.
In the N2 building, the solar-thermal production was also part of the validation, with a deviation of the cumulated energy gain of 0.4% at the end of the validation period.
(a)
Validation of the O5 dining room.
(b)
Cumulated heating energy demand of the entire O5-iPump building.
Figure 6
:
Comparison of simulation data to TwinHouse data.
4.3
Plausibility checks for the simulation study
Table 4
:
Dependency analysis of building parameter impact based on mean variables of the entire building (x- and y-axes).
x-axis
y-axis
color
code
dependency
expected
cooling demand
heat demand
age
yes
electricity demand
heat demand
age
yes
cooling demand
heat demand
location
yes
cooling demand
heat demand
rotation
no
electricity demand
heat demand
BSE
no
electricity demand
heat demand
night setback
no
cooling demand
heat demand
window glazing
yes
electricity demand
compressor frequency
age
yes
cooling demand
heat demand
ventilation
no
supply temperature
compressor frequency
age
no
cooling demand
heat demand
number of rooms
no
electricity demand
supply temperature
age
yes
heat demand
supply temperature
age
yes
cooling demand
heat demand
size
yes
cooling demand
heat demand
building mass
no
The final validation step verifies that all parameters varied in the simulation study are correctly implemented in the TRNSYS model and produce the expected influence on the results. To this end, we perform a plausibility analysis by comparing all simulation cases using summary statistics of the three-year time series, as recommended by
30
. Table
4
summarizes all considered validation cases.
We focus on the most relevant variables, including those identified as sensitive during the simulation setup, and consider all varied parameters from Figure
4
.
Each validation case analyzes the relationship between two variables represented on the x- and y-axes, while the varied parameter is indicated by the color code. For the two variables, the mean of the entire building is considered. Later, we will also discuss a room-level validation.
The cases with expected dependencies are shown in Figure
7
.
(a)
Heating and cooling power vs. building age
(b)
Heating and electrical power vs. building age
(c)
Heating and cooling power vs. weather location
(d)
Heating and cooling power vs. glazing type
(e)
Compressor frequency and electricity consumption vs. building age
(f)
Supply temperature and electricity consumption vs. building age
(g)
Supply temperature and heating power vs. building age
(h)
Heating and cooling power vs. building age
Figure 7
:
Scatter plot analysis of simulation results on building level using two variables and one varied parameter.
Figure
7(a)
shows the first example, depicting the dependency between building age and the average heating and cooling power. It can be seen that the older 1980-buildings (blue) tend to have higher heating demand, while newer buildings (green) have lower heating demand but higher cooling demand. Such behavior is expected.
Figure
7(b)
shows the dependency between building age, average heating power, and corresponding electricity consumption. Here, the higher heating demand of older buildings is also evident. Along with the higher heating demand, an increase in electrical power can be observed. The curve shows that the thermal-to-electrical ratio bends towards lower coefficients of performance (COP) for older buildings with higher supply temperatures. Since the heat pump model for older buildings with higher demand is scaled up but not modified, there are no changes in COP values across age classes.
Figure
7(c)
shows the dependency of average heating and cooling power on the buildings’ location.
Bolzano (dark-gray) has the highest cooling demand because it has the warmest, sunniest climate. Holzkirchen and Warsaw, characterized by the lowest outdoor air temperatures, show the highest heating demands, closely followed by Copenhagen. Paris with the most average climate among the selected five locations is not outstanding regarding heating or cooling.
Figure
7(d)
shows the dependency between average heating and cooling power on the type of glazing. It can be seen that cooling loads are reduced with solar protection glazing. No difference in heating demand is observed, as the reduction in solar gains during the darker winter months is relatively small.
Figure
7(e)
shows the dependency between the average electric power for space heating and the average heat pumps’ compressor frequency for the three building ages. First, it is clear that higher heat demands result in a more intensive compressor usage. Second, the difference in building ages results from scaling the heat pumps to each building’s age and its corresponding design heat load. Thus, the 1980 heat pump (blue) delivers 300 W at a compressor frequency 7 s
-1
, whereas the smaller 2020 unit (green) requires approximately 13 s
-1
to provide the same thermal power.
Figure
7(f)
shows the average supply temperatures and electrical consumption ratios for different building ages. In addition to the increased electrical consumption observed in older buildings, the average supply temperatures also rise with building age, as higher heating demands require higher design supply temperatures according to the applied heating curves.
Figure
7(g)
exhibits a similar trend to Figure
7(f)
, as the electrical power consumption is replaced by the heating power, which results in a different scaling of the x-axis.
Figure
7(h)
shows the average heating and cooling loads with the building size (80%, 100%, 120%) as the color-coded property. The average heating power depends on the size, since larger buildings have a larger envelope area. For the cooling power, the influence is less clear since not only the window areas, and so the solar gains, scale with the building size, but also the internal wall and ceilings with their thermal mass buffering the solar gains.
Additionally, we perform plausibility checks at room level. The list of room-based checks is documented in Table
5
. The expected dependencies are shown in Figure
8
. In these three scatter plots, the minimum values for the room air temperature and the minimum of the relative room air humidity, based on 15-minute averages, are compared to a color-coded parameter.
Figure
8(a)
shows the living room’s minimum air temperature and minimum relative room air humidity. It can be seen that natural ventilation (windows) results in much lower minimum temperatures than mechanical ventilation. Mechanical ventilation continuously exchanges the rooms’ air at a relatively slow rate. Window openings, on the other hand, lead to brief but intense air exchange with the outside, resulting in very low room air temperatures for a short time. Lower minimum air temperatures correspond to lower minimum air humidities because both result from a higher air exchange rate during window opening.
In Figure
8(b)
, the color encodes the location while the x- and y-axes remain unchanged. The two ventilation system groups are still visible. Locations with colder outdoor temperatures in winter and accordingly drier climates show lower minimum room air temperatures and relative humidities.
Figure
8(c)
uses the night setback temperature as the color-coded parameter. The upper block again represents cases with mechanical ventilation and shows that buildings with night setback achieve lower minimum room temperatures because the setpoint temperature is reduced during nighttime operation. In the cases with natural ventilation, the temperature reduction is mainly driven by window opening.
Table 5
:
Dependency analysis of building parameter impact based on room-level mean and minimum variable values shown on the x- and y-axes.
type
x-axis
y-axis
color
code
dependency expected
mean
valve time
air temperature
size
no
mean
valve time
air temperature
solar protection glazing
no
min
rel. humidity
air temperature
age
no
min
rel. humidity
air temperature
location
yes
min
rel. humidity
air temperature
ventilation
yes
min
rel. humidity
air temperature
building mass
no
min
rel. humidity
air temperature
night setback
yes
(a)
Minimal room air temperature and humidity vs. ventilation type
(b)
Minimal room air temperature and humidity vs. weather location
(c)
Heating and cooling power vs. night setback
Figure 8
:
Scatterplot analysis of simulation results on room level.
5
Usage Notes
Overall, the dataset can be directly used for any tasks, as described in Section
1
. The real-world data is provided in two forms: measured data, including measurement gaps, and imputed data with filled gaps. The simulated data contains no gaps. In all data files, unavailable values are marked as NaN. These values may occur for buildings with fewer than seven zones or for buildings without DHW systems. Furthermore, flow temperatures are physically meaningful only when the mass flow rate is greater than zero, as explained in Section
3.2
. Lastly, it should be noted that the dataset is intended to promote research in thermal dynamics modeling for transfer learning applications, model generalization, and the simulation-to-reality transfer rather than representing a single deterministic building behavior.
6
Data Availability
https://fordatis.fraunhofer.de/handle/fordatis/486
http://dx.doi.org/10.24406/fordatis/445
7
Code Availability
The TRNSYS models, including the associated input data files, are not made publicly available since they contain confidential source code regarding the heat pumps’ control. Without detailed information on how the TRNSYS result files are generated, the provided postprocessing code cannot be meaningfully used.
The Python code for KNN-based imputation of data gaps in the measurements is shown below (raw data are provided in parallel):
Listing 1:
Script for KNN imputation of missing measurement data.
⬇
1
import
pandas
as
pd
2
import
os
3
from
sklearn
.
impute
import
KNNImputer
4
5
path
=
"###project
folder###\\"
6
filepath
=
os
.
path
.
join
(
path
,
"N2_ThermBuild_measure_2026-01-02.xlsx"
)
7
dat_raw
=
pd
.
read_excel
(
filepath
,
index_col
=0)
8
del
filepath
9
10
imputer
=
KNNImputer
(
n_neighbors
=5)
11
dat
=
imputer
.
fit_transform
(
dat_raw
)
12
dat
=
pd
.
DataFrame
(
dat
,
columns
=
dat_raw
.
columns
)
13
14
filepath
=
os
.
path
.
join
(
path
,
"N2_ThermBuild_measure_2026-01-02-KNNn5.xlsx"
)
15
dat
.
to_excel
(
filepath
)
References
IEA 2023
IEA.
Tracking clean energy progress 2023.
Technical report, International Energy Agency, 2023.
URL
https://www.iea.org/reports/tracking-clean-energy-progress-2023
.
Chen et al. 2023
Zhelun Chen, Zheng O’Neill, Jin Wen, Ojas Pradhan, Tao Yang, Xing Lu, Guanjing Lin, Shohei Miyata, Seungjae Lee, Chou Shen, Roberto Chiosa, Marco Savino Piscitelli, Alfonso Capozzoli, Franz Hengel, Alexander Kührer, Marco Pritoni, Wei Liu, John ClauSS, Yimin Chen, and Terry Herr.
A review of data-driven fault detection and diagnostics for building hvac systems.
Applied Energy
, 339:121030, 2023.
ISSN 0306-2619.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2023.121030
.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S030626192300394X
.
Drgoňa et al. 2020
Ján Drgoňa, Javier Arroyo, Iago Cupeiro Figueroa, David Blum, Krzysztof Arendt, Donghun Kim, Enric Perarnau Ollé, Juraj Oravec, Michael Wetter, Draguna L. Vrabie, and Lieve Helsen.
All you need to know about model predictive control for buildings.
Annual Reviews in Control
, 50:190–232, 2020.
ISSN 13675788.
doi:
10.1016/j.arcontrol.2020.09.001
.
Nagy et al. 2023
Zoltan Nagy, Gregor Henze, Sourav Dey, Javier Arroyo, Lieve Helsen, Xiangyu Zhang, Bingqing Chen, Kadir Amasyali, Kuldeep Kurte, Ahmed Zamzam, Helia Zandi, Ján Drgoňa, Matias Quintana, Steven McCullogh, June Young Park, Han Li, Tianzhen Hong, Silvio Brandi, Giuseppe Pinto, Alfonso Capozzoli, Draguna Vrabie, Mario Bergés, Kingsley Nweye, Thibault Marzullo, and Andrey Bernstein.
Ten questions concerning reinforcement learning for building energy management.
Building and Environment
, 241:110435, 2023.
ISSN 0360-1323.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2023.110435
.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360132323004626
.
Raisch et al. 2025
Fabian Raisch, Thomas Krug, Christoph Goebel, and Benjamin Tischler.
Gentl: A general transfer learning model for building thermal dynamics.
In
Proceedings of the 16th ACM International Conference on Future and Sustainable Energy Systems
, E-Energy ’25, page 322–333, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery.
ISBN 9798400711251.
doi:
10.1145/3679240.3734589
.
URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3679240.3734589
.
Raisch et al. 2026a
Fabian Raisch, Max Langtry, Felix Koch, Ruchi Choudhary, Christoph Goebel, and Benjamin Tischler.
Adapting to change: A comparison of continual and transfer learning for modeling building thermal dynamics under concept drifts.
Energy and Buildings
, 354:116868, 2026a.
ISSN 0378-7788.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2025.116868
.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378778825015981
.
Koch et al. 2026
Felix Koch, Fabian Raisch, and Benjamin Tischler.
Thermal-gems: Generalized models for building thermal dynamics, 2026.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.16443
.
Li et al. 2024
Han Li, Giuseppe Pinto, Marco Savino Piscitelli, Alfonso Capozzoli, and Tianzhen Hong.
Building thermal dynamics modeling with deep transfer learning using a large residential smart thermostat dataset.
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
, 130:107701, 2024.
Dou and Zhang 2025
Hongwen Dou and Kun Zhang.
Transfer learning for cross-building forecasting of building energy and indoor air temperature in model predictive control applications.
Journal of Building Engineering
, page 113341, 2025.
de Vargas et al. 2026
Jan Marco Ruiz de Vargas, Fabian Raisch, Zoltan Nagy, Pierre Pinson, and Christoph Goebel.
Counter-dyna: Data-efficient rl-based hvac control using counterfactual building models, 2026.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.04555
.
Raisch et al. 2026b
Fabian Raisch, Timo Germann, J. Nathan Kutz, Christoph Goebel, and Benjamin Tischler.
Transfer learning for neural parameter estimation applied to building rc models, 2026b.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.05904
.
Pinto et al. 2022
Giuseppe Pinto, Riccardo Messina, Han Li, Tianzhen Hong, Marco Savino Piscitelli, and Alfonso Capozzoli.
Sharing is caring: An extensive analysis of parameter-based transfer learning for the prediction of building thermal dynamics.
Energy and Buildings
, 276:112530, 2022.
Strachan et al. 2016
Paul Strachan, Katalin Svehla, Ingo Heusler, and Matthias Kersken.
Whole model empirical validation on a full-scale building, 2016.
URL
https://publica.fraunhofer.de/handle/publica/241872
.
Kersken et al. 2025
Matthias Kersken, Gabriel Rojas, and Paul Strachan.
Uncertainty of the predictions of different programs and modelling teams based on a detailed empirical validation dataset, 2025.
URL
https://publica.fraunhofer.de/handle/publica/479714
.
Miller et al. 2020
Clayton Miller, Anjukan Kathirgamanathan, Bianca Picchetti, Pandarasamy Arjunan, June Young Park, Zoltan Nagy, Paul Raftery, Brodie W Hobson, Zixiao Shi, and Forrest Meggers.
The building data genome project 2, energy meter data from the ashrae great energy predictor iii competition.
Scientific data
, 7(1):368, 2020.
Emami et al. 2023
Patrick Emami, Abhijeet Sahu, and Peter Graf.
Buildingsbench: A large-scale dataset of 900k buildings and benchmark for short-term load forecasting.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
, 36:19823–19857, 2023.
Luo and Hong 2022
Na Luo and Tianzhen Hong.
Ecobee donate your data 1,000 homes in 2017.
Technical report, Pacific Northwest National Lab.(PNNL), Richland, WA (United States), 2022.
Berkes et al. 2025
Anaïs Berkes, Yoshua Bengio, David Rolnick, and Donna Vakalis.
A hot dataset: 150,000 buildings for hvac operations transfer research.
In
Proceedings of the 12th ACM International Conference on Systems for Energy-Efficient Buildings, Cities, and Transportation
, pages 171–180, 2025.
Pullinger et al. 2021
Martin Pullinger, Jonathan Kilgour, Nigel Goddard, Niklas Berliner, Lynda Webb, Myroslava Dzikovska, Heather Lovell, Janek Mann, Charles Sutton, Janette Webb, et al.
The ideal household energy dataset, electricity, gas, contextual sensor data and survey data for 255 uk homes.
Scientific Data
, 8(1):146, 2021.
Klein et al. 2017
S. A. Klein, W. A. Beckman, J. W. Mitchell, J. A. Duffie, T. L. Freeman, J. C. Mitchell, J. E. Braun, B. L. Evans, J. P. Kummer, R. E. Urban, A. Fiksel, J. W. Thornton, N. J. Blair, J. A. Beckman, and S. J. Klein.
TRNSYS 18: A Transient System Simulation Program
.
Solar Energy Laboratory, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA, 2017.
URL
http://sel.me.wisc.edu/trnsys
.
for Economic Affairs and Energy 2020
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy.
Gebäudeenergiegesetz (geg) – buildings energy act.
Bundesgesetzblatt (BGBl.) I, 2020.
URL
https://geg-info.de/geg/2020.08.13._bundesgesetzblatt_geg_2020_verkundung.pdf
.
from Aug. 8th 2020.
Flett and Kelly 2021
G. H. Flett and N. Kelly.
Occdem - a program to generate statistically-based occupancy and occupant-driven electrical demand profiles.
Computer software (OccDem_0(2.zip), March 2021.
Creator: G. H. Flett; Contributor: N. Kelly.
Thomas 2006
Randall Thomas.
Environmental Design
.
Taylor & Francis, 2006.
ISBN 9780415363341.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203013663
.
Loga et al. 2012
Tobias Loga, Nikolaus Diefenbach, and Britta Stein.
Typology approach for building stock energy assessment.
Technical report, Institut Wohnen und Umwelt, Darmstadt, Germany, 2012.
Bundesinstitut für Bau-, Stadt- und Raumforschung (2023) BBSR
Bundesinstitut für Bau-, Stadt- und Raumforschung (BBSR).
Regeln zur datenaufnahme und datenverwendung im wohngebäudebestand.
Bekanntmachung, Bundesinstitut für Bau-, Stadt- und Raumforschung, 2023.
URL
https://www.bbsr-geg.bund.de/GEGPortal/DE/ErgaenzendendeRegelungen/Bekanntmachungen/Bestandsberechnungen/Download/WGDatenaufnahmeGEG_DL.pdf
.
Ergänzende Regelungen zum Gebäudeenergiegesetz (GEG).
Dorer and Weber 2009
Viktor Dorer and Andreas Weber.
Trnflow – a module for coupled multizone airflow and thermal simulation in trnsys.
Technical report, EMPA, Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Testing and Research, Dübendorf, Switzerland, 2009.
Version 1.4.
Feustel and Dieris 1992
Helmut E. Feustel and Johannes Dieris.
Comis – an international multizone air-flow and contaminant transport model.
Technical Report LBL-28560, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA, 1992.
Schnieders et al. 2020
Jürgen Schnieders, Tim Delhey Eian, Marco Filippi, Javier Florez, Berthold Kaufmann, Stefanos Pallantzas, Monte Paulsen, Elena Reyes, Micheel Wassouf, and Shih-Chieh Yeh.
Design and realisation of the passive house concept in different climate zones.
Energy Efficiency
, 13(8):1561–1604, 2020.
Meteotest 2020
Meteotest.
Meteonorm 8: Global meteorological database for solar energy and climatology
.
Meteotest, Bern, Switzerland, 2020.
URL
https://meteonorm.com
.
Computer software.
Zhai et al. 2026
Zhiqiang John Zhai, Tianzhen Hong, Matthaios Santamouris, and Jian-Lei Niu.
Validation practices for simulation-based research.
Energy and Buildings
, 352:116853, 2026.
ISSN 0378-7788.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2025.116853
.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S037877882501583X
.
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers 2014
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers.
ASHRAE Guideline 14-2014: Measurement of Energy, Demand, and Water Savings
.
ASHRAE, Atlanta, Georgia, 2014.
URL
https://www.ashrae.org
.
Includes guidelines for measurement and verification of energy, demand, and water savings in buildings projects.
Author Contributions
Fabian Raisch
: Conceptualization, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Writing
Matthias Kersken
: Conceptualization, Validation, Methodology, Investigation (Simulation study, validation, benchmarking), Writing
Markus Male
: Supervision, Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing
Benjamin Tischler
: Supervision, Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing
Competing Interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Funding
The project was funded by the German Federal Institute for Research on Building, Urban Affairs, and Spatial Development on behalf of the Federal Ministry for Housing, Urban Development, and Building through the research funding program “Zukunft Bau“ under the grant number 10.08.18.7-24.49.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA