The Information Content of Quasar Variability Light Curves: How Well Can we Infer Stochastic Model Parameters?
Report GitHub Issue
Г—
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
2
Bayesian CAR(1) Fitting
2.1
Bayesian Inference
2.2
CAR(1) Likelihood Function
2.3
Choice of Coordinates and Prior Distributions
3
The Posterior Distribution from a Single Light Curve
4
Information Theory
5
Logarithmic Scoring Rule
6
Hierarchical Analysis
6.1
Data Cleaning
6.2
Model Specification
6.3
Priors
6.4
Results
7
Conclusion
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2606.01496v1 [astro-ph.GA] 31 May 2026
The Information Content of Quasar Variability Light Curves:
How Well Can we Infer Stochastic Model Parameters?
Brendon J. Brewer
1
1
1
bj.brewer@auckland.ac.nz
Department of Statistics, The University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand
Geraint F. Lewis
Sydney Institute for Astronomy, School of Physics, A28, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
Xiang Yu (Ryan)
Department of Statistics, The University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand
Yuan Li (Cher)
Department of Statistics, The University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand
Abstract
ABSTRACT
Quasar variability, driven by multi-scale physical processing within a relativistic accretion disk, is commonly modelled with stochastic time series
models. The simplest of these is the
Damped Random Walk (DRW),
also known as the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process.
Here, we demonstrate that, when fitting such a model to quasar light
curve data, the mean of the light curve,
Ој
\mu
, should not be fixed (which is the typical approach), as this leads to overconfident inferences
about the variability timescale
П„
\tau
, with substantially underestimated
uncertainties.
However, the short term volatility parameter
О·
\eta
is typically very well constrained from short light curves.
Through simulations, we compute information theoretic quantities
such as the conditional entropy and the mutual information,
confirming that light curves provide much more information about
О·
\eta
than about
П„
\tau
.
As a result, we recommend that future
quasar variability studies focus on
О·
\eta
rather than
П„
\tau
.
To demonstrate this approach, we fit a
hierarchical Bayesian regression
model for
О·
\eta
as a function of bolometric luminosity and rest
wavelength to a dataset of 570 light curves measured over decades.
We perform the fit using a likelihood function that uses
the light curves
directly, rather than using intermediate
О·
\eta
values from individual
light curve fits. We find that volatility decreases as a function
of both
bolometric luminosity and rest wavelength.
The volatility also decreases more steeply with redshift than
time dilation alone would suggest, pointing to an increase in
intrinsic volatility as quasars evolve over cosmic time.
keywords:
quasars: general, methods: statistical
1
Introduction
Quasars are among the most luminous and dynamic objects in the Universe, their prodigious energy output powered by the accretion of matter onto supermassive black holes residing in the centres of galaxies
(see Padovani
et al.
,
2017
)
. They exhibit variability across essentially all observed wavelengths and on timescales ranging from hours to decades. This variability is widely understood to arise from the intricate and highly non-linear physics operating within relativistic accretion discs, where turbulent magnetohydrodynamic flows, radiation transport, thermal instabilities, and strong gravitational effects combine to produce complex and evolving emission signatures
(e.g. Czerny
et al.
,
2023
)
. The resulting variability provides a unique observational window into physical processes occurring on scales otherwise inaccessible to direct imaging.
Given the physical complexities,
ab initio
modelling of quasar light curves presents a significant challenge
(e.g. Fagin
et al.
,
2025
)
. Hence, quasar variability is
often represented as a statistical process described by a few parameters.
It has been established that a Damp Random Walk (DRW) approach, in particular the CAR(1) process (continuous autoregressive process of order 1),
represents quasar variability well
(Kelly
et al.
,
2009
)
. Whilst there is some evidence that
the quasar variability might depart from this model
(e.g. Zu
et al.
,
2013
)
, with more sophisticated models being available
(Kelly
et al.
,
2014
)
, it remains a useful approximation with a relatively simple set of parameters including a characteristic timescale
П„
\tau
.
However, to accurately determine the CAR(1) parameters, sufficiently long temporal observations of quasar light curves are essential, with durations exceeding the typical time scale by a factor of at least ten
(KozЕӮowski,
2017
)
. However, the statistical characteristics of variability feed into other quasar studies, such as reverberation mapping and using quasars as cosmological probes.
Extensive samples of quasar light curves are now becoming available, with
Stone
et al.
(
2022
)
, hereafter S22,
presenting multiband variability and estimates of
П„
\tau
(with uncertainties)
for a sample of almost 200 quasars over a two decade period.
Assuming that the timescale parameter
П„
\tau
can be used as a clock to time quasar variability,
Lewis and Brewer (
2023
)
and
Brewer
et al.
(
2025
)
used the
Stone
et al.
(
2022
)
estimates
to confirm the expected presence of cosmological time dilation in the variability timescales. However, the robustness of this cosmological measurement is dependent upon robustness of the measurement of the timescale
П„
\tau
, and hence it is essential to
investigate the reliability of the inference processes involved in determining
П„
\tau
from the light curves.
This will form the focus of this paper.
The layout of this paper is as follows: Section
2
covers the background required for fitting CAR(1) models including details about the parameters, the prior
distributions, the likelihood function, and the computational approach.
In Section
3
, we demonstrate the issues involved in fitting
CAR(1) models to light curve data, based on a simulated dataset
as an example.
In Section
4
, we use information theory to quantify the
amount of information light curves typically contain about the stochastic model
parameters. Section
5
extends this analysis to quantify the
cost of certain modelling choices in terms of the reliability of the inferences
about
П„
\tau
. The results of these sections lead us to focus on a short term
volatility parameter
О·
\eta
as it is much better constrained than
П„
\tau
.
In Section
6
we fit a hierarchical regression model to
the S22 sample of quasars to determine how quasar volatility
О·
\eta
depends on redshift, luminosity, and the rest wavelength of the observations.
Finally, we conclude in Section
7
.
2
Bayesian CAR(1) Fitting
Typical light curve data for a particular quasar in a particular waveband
consists of a series of timestamps
рқ’•
=
{
t
1
,
вҖҰ
,
t
N
}
\boldsymbol{t}=\{t_{1},...,t_{N}\}
, a corresponding sequence of brightness measurements
рқ’ҡ
=
{
y
1
,
вҖҰ
,
y
N
}
\boldsymbol{y}=\{y_{1},...,y_{N}\}
(which we will take to be in magnitudes),
and error bars
рқ’”
=
{
s
1
,
вҖҰ
,
s
N
}
\boldsymbol{s}=\{s_{1},...,s_{N}\}
which indicate the
uncertainty on the brightness measurements.
Our notation for the magnitude measurements uses a subscript (e.g.,
y
i
y_{i}
) for
the observed values including measurement error.
When we discuss the underlying error-free
continuous curve, we still use the symbol
y
y
but with parentheses; i.e.,
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
y(t)
.
2.1
Bayesian Inference
To fit a stochastic variability model to such data, we must
identify the model parameters
рқңҪ
\boldsymbol{\theta}
,
specify their prior distribution
p
вҖӢ
(
рқңҪ
)
p(\boldsymbol{\theta})
,
and also specify the sampling distribution
2
2
2
Sampling distribution
is the traditional term, but the sampling distribution is
best understood as a representing
prior information about the relationship between the data
and the parameters
(Caticha and Giffin,
2006
; Caticha,
2021
)
.
for the data
p
вҖӢ
(
рқ’ҡ
|
рқңҪ
)
p(\boldsymbol{y}\,|\,\boldsymbol{\theta})
, describing what
data we would expect to observe as a function of the parameters.
BayesвҖҷs theorem then gives the posterior distribution for the
model parameters
p
вҖӢ
(
рқңҪ
|
рқ’ҡ
)
\displaystyle p(\boldsymbol{\theta}\,|\,\boldsymbol{y})
=
p
вҖӢ
(
рқңҪ
)
вҖӢ
p
вҖӢ
(
рқ’ҡ
|
рқңҪ
)
p
вҖӢ
(
рқ’ҡ
)
,
\displaystyle=\frac{p(\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{y}\,|\,\boldsymbol{\theta})}{p(\boldsymbol{y})},
(1)
where
p
вҖӢ
(
рқ’ҡ
|
рқңҪ
)
p(\boldsymbol{y}\,|\,\boldsymbol{\theta})
is the likelihood function (obtained
by substituting the observed data into the expression for the sampling
distribution) and the denominator is the marginal likelihood or evidence
value, given by
p
вҖӢ
(
рқ’ҡ
)
\displaystyle p(\boldsymbol{y})
=
вҲ«
p
вҖӢ
(
рқңҪ
)
вҖӢ
p
вҖӢ
(
рқ’ҡ
|
рқңҪ
)
вҖӢ
рқ‘‘
рқңҪ
.
\displaystyle=\int p(\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{y}\,|\,\boldsymbol{\theta})\,d\boldsymbol{\theta}.
(2)
The posterior distribution is often characterised by generating samples
from it using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques
(Sharma,
2017
)
. If required, marginal likelihoods and
posterior samples can also be computed simultaneously using
Nested Sampling
(Skilling,
2006
)
.
In this paper, we use Diffusive Nested Sampling
(Brewer
et al.
,
2011
)
,
as implemented in the DNest4 package
(Brewer and Foreman-Mackey,
2018
)
,
to sample from posterior distributions and compute marginal likelihoods.
2.2
CAR(1) Likelihood Function
The likelihood function for the CAR(1) model can be obtained in
two equivalent ways вҖ” using the state space representation
(Kelly
et al.
,
2009
)
or using Gaussian processes
(Williams and Rasmussen,
2006
)
. We will use the latter framework
as it is more familiar to most readers and to the authors.
For a review of Gaussian process applications in astronomy, see
Aigrain and Foreman-Mackey (
2023
)
.
In the CAR(1) model, the joint distribution for the signal
at a collection of times
t
1
,
вҖҰ
,
t
N
t_{1},...,t_{N}
, conditional on the
CAR(1) parameters, is a multivariate normal distribution, given
by
p
вҖӢ
(
рқ’ҡ
|
рқңҪ
)
\displaystyle p(\boldsymbol{y}\,|\,\boldsymbol{\theta})
=
1
(
2
вҖӢ
ПҖ
)
N
вҖӢ
det
рқ‘Ә
вҖӢ
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
1
2
вҖӢ
(
рқ’ҡ
вҲ’
рққҒ
)
T
вҖӢ
рқ‘Ә
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
(
рқ’ҡ
вҲ’
рққҒ
)
)
.
\displaystyle=\frac{1}{\sqrt{(2\pi)^{N}\det\boldsymbol{C}}}\exp\left(-\frac{1}{2}(\boldsymbol{y}-\boldsymbol{\mu})^{T}\boldsymbol{C}^{-1}(\boldsymbol{y}-\boldsymbol{\mu})\right).
(3)
The CAR(1) model implies a certain form for the covariance
matrix
рқ‘Ә
\boldsymbol{C}
, which depends on the CAR(1) parameters.
Specifically,
the covariance between the signal at two different times,
y
вҖӢ
(
t
1
)
y(t_{1})
and
y
вҖӢ
(
t
2
)
y(t_{2})
, is given by
C
вҖӢ
(
t
1
,
t
2
)
\displaystyle C(t_{1},t_{2})
=
Пғ
2
вҖӢ
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
|
t
2
вҲ’
t
1
|
П„
)
,
\displaystyle=\sigma^{2}\exp\left(-\frac{|t_{2}-t_{1}|}{\tau}\right),
(4)
where
П„
\tau
is a timescale parameter describing how long it takes
for
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
y(t)
to be somewhat less correlated with its previous values,
and
Пғ
\sigma
is a parameter
describing the typical degree of deviation of
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
y(t)
from its mean
value
Ој
\mu
(which we assume to be a constant with time вҖ”
making
рққҒ
\boldsymbol{\mu}
in Equation
3
a vector of length
N
N
, all of whose elements are the same value).
Equation
4
gives the covariance
for the underlying measurement-error-free signal
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
y(t)
at
the timestamps. However, we also need to take into account measurement
error, in order for Equation
3
to be valid for the
observational data itself.
To achieve this, we add extra values to the diagonal of the
covariance matrix, based on the reported error bars
{
s
i
}
\{s_{i}\}
and
an additional white noise parameter, commonly called вҖҳjitterвҖҷ
(which can also be interpreted
as expanding the error bars by an amount
that is added in quadrature to the reported error bars).
The covariance matrix elements are therefore
C
i
вҖӢ
j
\displaystyle C_{ij}
=
Пғ
2
вҖӢ
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
|
t
j
вҲ’
t
i
|
П„
)
+
[
s
i
2
+
(
jitter
)
2
]
вҖӢ
Оҙ
i
вҖӢ
j
,
\displaystyle=\sigma^{2}\exp\left(-\frac{|t_{j}-t_{i}|}{\tau}\right)+\left[s_{i}^{2}+(\textnormal{jitter})^{2}\right]\delta_{ij},
(5)
where
Оҙ
i
вҖӢ
j
\delta_{ij}
is the Kronecker delta.
In practice, it is computationally expensive to evaluate
the likelihood function of Equation
3
.
Naive calculation is very expensive, and ordinarily it
can be significantly sped up using the Cholesky
factorisation of the covariance matrix
рқ‘Ә
\boldsymbol{C}
.
However, this approach still scales as
O
вҖӢ
(
N
3
)
O(N^{3})
.
For certain types of covariance matrix such as the CAR(1)
covariance function,
specialised acceleration techniques are possible
due to the sparse and/or banded structure of the inverse
covariance matrix, reducing the computational cost to
O
вҖӢ
(
N
)
O(N)
. To benefit from these speed-ups
we used the
celerite2
Python package
(Foreman-Mackey,
2018
)
to implement the log likelihood function throughout this study.
The parameter
Пғ
\sigma
has a simple interpretation as the stationary
(marginal)
standard deviation of
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
y(t)
at all times, and thus describes how
different
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
y(t)
is from its typical value
Ој
\mu
, over long
timescales. However, when inferring the parameters
рқңҪ
=
{
Ој
,
Пғ
,
П„
,
jitter
}
\boldsymbol{\theta}=\{\mu,\sigma,\tau,{\rm jitter}\}
from
light curves using this model, there is often a very strong
correlation between
Пғ
\sigma
and
П„
\tau
in the posterior distribution. Datasets can often
be explained by either low
Пғ
\sigma
and low
П„
\tau
, or high
Пғ
\sigma
and high
П„
\tau
.
To mitigate any MCMC sampling inefficiencies caused by this correlation,
it is usually better to work in terms of a short term volatility parameter
given by
О·
\displaystyle\eta
=
Пғ
вҖӢ
2
П„
.
\displaystyle=\sigma\sqrt{\frac{2}{\tau}}.
(6)
This
О·
\eta
parameter is the one that naturally appears in the
stochastic differential equation formulation of this
model
(Kelly
et al.
,
2009
)
.
For completeness, the stochastic differential equation
for this process is given by
d
вҖӢ
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
\displaystyle dy(t)
=
вҲ’
1
П„
вҖӢ
(
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
вҲ’
Ој
)
вҖӢ
d
вҖӢ
t
+
О·
вҖӢ
d
вҖӢ
W
вҖӢ
(
t
)
,
\displaystyle=-\frac{1}{\tau}(y(t)-\mu)\,dt+\eta\,dW(t),
(7)
where
W
вҖӢ
(
t
)
W(t)
is a standard Wiener process and
d
вҖӢ
W
вҖӢ
(
t
)
dW(t)
is a
normally distributed white noise increment.
When we work with days as the time units,
О·
\eta
has a simple
interpretation, as long as
П„
вү«
1
\tau\gg 1
day вҖ” it is the
typical size of day-to-day fluctuations in
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
y(t)
.
In summary, the parameters of the model for a single light
curve are:
вҖў
Ој
\mu
, the typical magnitude around which the light
curve fluctuates;
вҖў
Пғ
\sigma
, the degree of variation around
Ој
\mu
;
вҖў
П„
\tau
, the timescale over which the signal
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
y(t)
becomes decorrelated from its past values;
вҖў
О·
\eta
, the short term volatility; and
вҖў
jitter
{\rm jitter}
, the amount of extra independent noise
that is present, above and beyond what is reported in the
error bars
{
s
i
}
\{s_{i}\}
.
Of the middle three parameters, only two are actually
genuine parameters and the third may be derived from the other
two. The choice of which parameters to use as coordinates is
discussed in detail in Section
2.3
.
Another derived parameter that may be of interest is a measure
of annual variability. We can compute the conditional distribution
of the signal
y
вҖӢ
(
t
+
365
)
y(t+365)
given the current signal
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
y(t)
and the
parameters
3
3
3
Note that all temporal properties are given in units of days throughout this paper unless explicitly noted.
. This is a normal distribution
whose expected value represents probable drift towards
Ој
\mu
:
y
вҖӢ
(
t
+
365
)
|
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
\displaystyle y(t+365)\,|\,y(t)
вҲј
Normal
вҖӢ
(
Ој
+
(
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
вҲ’
Ој
)
вҖӢ
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
365
/
П„
)
,
Пғ
2
вҖӢ
(
1
вҲ’
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
(
2
Г—
365
)
/
П„
)
)
)
.
\displaystyle\sim\textnormal{Normal}\left(\mu+(y(t)-\mu)\exp(-365/\tau),\sigma^{2}(1-\exp(-(2\times 365)/\tau))\right).
(8)
The standard deviation is simply the square root of the variance,
which, unlike the mean, does not depend on the current value of the
signal
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
y(t)
. It can be used straightforwardly as a measure of
annual variation:
sd
вҖӢ
(
y
вҖӢ
(
t
+
365
)
|
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
)
\displaystyle\textnormal{sd}\left(y(t+365)\,|\,y(t)\right)
=
Пғ
вҖӢ
(
1
вҲ’
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
(
2
Г—
365
)
/
П„
)
)
.
\displaystyle=\sigma\sqrt{(1-\exp(-(2\times 365)/\tau))}.
(9)
2.3
Choice of Coordinates and Prior Distributions
In this paper we will use two different prior distributions
for the CAR(1) parameters: a somewhat informative, physically motivated prior,
and an uninformative, convenient flat prior (flat in the logarithm for
some parameters). The issues we explore are present
in both cases, but tend to be more dramatic in the case of the flat prior.
However, before specifying the priors, we must take care to choose an
appropriate coordinate system on the parameter space
for implementing the inference. Using
(
Ој
,
Пғ
,
П„
,
jitter
)
(\mu,\sigma,\tau,{\rm jitter})
as the parameters, as discussed
previously, is intuitively clean, but often
results in very strongly dependent posterior distributions (especially
between
Пғ
\sigma
and
П„
\tau
), which can cause MCMC mixing problems.
To avoid this,
(
Ој
,
О·
,
П„
,
jitter
)
(\mu,\eta,\tau,{\rm jitter})
is often preferred,
where the stationary standard deviation
Пғ
\sigma
has been replaced
by the short term volatility
О·
\eta
.
The stationary standard deviation
Пғ
\sigma
can then be calculated as a derived parameter using
Equation
6
, if it is of interest.
However, we have elected to use an unconventional third option, parameterising
via
(
Ој
,
Пғ
,
О·
,
jitter
)
(\mu,\sigma,\eta,{\rm jitter})
. This retains the computational
advantages of
(
Ој
,
О·
,
П„
,
jitter
)
(\mu,\eta,\tau,{\rm jitter})
(i.e., that the joint posterior
tends to be fairly independent), while also allowing us to
easily specify a prior for
Пғ
\sigma
since it is one of the
coordinates (in our view, it is easier to think about plausible
values of
Пғ
\sigma
, which describes how much an individual quasar
varies, than it is to think about plausible values of
П„
\tau
).
In this parameterisation,
П„
\tau
becomes a derived parameter, given by
П„
\displaystyle\tau
=
2
вҖӢ
(
Пғ
О·
)
2
,
\displaystyle=2\left(\frac{\sigma}{\eta}\right)^{2},
(10)
which is simply a rearrangement of Equation
6
.
Note that the issues presented in Sections
3
,
4
,
and
5
are not
caused by this choice of coordinates, and
remain present no matter which parameterisation is used.
We now turn our attention to the prior distribution for the
parameters
(
Ој
,
Пғ
,
О·
,
jitter
)
(\mu,\sigma,\eta,{\rm jitter})
.
Taking the logarithm of both sides of Equation
10
gives
4
4
4
Throughout this paper,
log
вҖӢ
(
)
\log()
denotes the natural logarithm
and
log
10
вҖӢ
(
)
\log_{10}()
is the base-10 logarithm.
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
\displaystyle\log_{10}(\sigma)
=
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
+
1
2
вҖӢ
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
вҲ’
1
2
вҖӢ
log
10
вҒЎ
(
2
)
.
\displaystyle=\log_{10}(\eta)+\frac{1}{2}\log_{10}(\tau)-\frac{1}{2}\log_{10}(2).
(11)
which is a linear transformation
from
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
and
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
to
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
\log_{10}(\sigma)
.
Therefore, if we were to assign
a joint normal distribution for the logarithmic quantities
in one of the parameterisations,
we would also have a joint normal distribution in the other вҖ”
a convenient property. Normal distributions thus seem to be a
natural and convenient choice for the informative priors.
However, in some Nested Sampling implementations,
the parameters are ultimately encoded as coordinates with
uniform prior distributions between 0 and 1, and the
inverse of the cumulative distribution function (CDF)
is then used to transform the coordinates to the actual model
parameters with the appropriate prior
5
5
5
DNest4
does not require this structure in general. However, the Python
model implementation feature of DNest4, which we use in this study,
does require this structure.
. For the normal
distribution this operation can be computationally costly as it needs to
occur millions of times.
Therefore, we chose to use the вҖҳlogisticвҖҷ
distribution in place of the normal distribution.
The logistic distribution is a good approximation to the normal distribution
(but with slightly heavier tails),
and has a fast inverse CDF which is simply
log
вҒЎ
(
u
/
(
1
вҲ’
u
)
)
\log(u/(1-u))
.
The informative priors we chose are:
Ој
\displaystyle\mu
вҲј
Logistic
вҖӢ
(
mean
=
20
,
sd
=
1.5
)
\displaystyle\sim\textnormal{Logistic}({\rm mean}=20,{\rm sd}=1.5)
(12)
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
\displaystyle\log_{10}(\sigma)
вҲј
Logistic
вҖӢ
(
mean
=
вҲ’
0.5
,
sd
=
0.5
)
\displaystyle\sim\textnormal{Logistic}({\rm mean}=-0.5,{\rm sd}=0.5)
(13)
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\displaystyle\log_{10}(\eta)
вҲј
Logistic
вҖӢ
(
mean
=
вҲ’
2
,
sd
=
0.6
)
\displaystyle\sim\textnormal{Logistic}({\rm mean}=-2,{\rm sd}=0.6)
(14)
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
)
\displaystyle\log_{10}({\rm jitter})
вҲј
Logistic
вҖӢ
(
mean
=
вҲ’
2
,
sd
=
0.5
)
.
\displaystyle\sim\textnormal{Logistic}({\rm mean}=-2,{\rm sd}=0.5).
(15)
For ease of thinking, we have written the logistic distributions in terms
of their means and standard deviations. These are very close approximations
to normal distributions with the same means and standard deviations,
but with the computational advantage of a cheaper inverse CDF.
The means and standard deviations of the informative priors were chosen using the following
arguments.
The informative prior for mean magnitude
Ој
\mu
is loosely based on the frequency distribution
of magnitudes
of quasars observed in large surveys
(e.g., Huda
et al.
,
2025
)
.
The prior for the long term variability standard deviation parameter
Пғ
\sigma
was
set to make it quite likely
(approximate 95% prior credible interval)
to be between
0.0316
0.0316
and
3.16
3.16
magnitudes.
The prior for the short term volatility
О·
\eta
was selected to make it
very likely to be between
0.000631
0.000631
and
0.158
0.158
magnitudes
day
вҲ’
1
/
2
{\rm day}^{-1/2}
.
The interpretation of
О·
\eta
is straightforward (at least when
П„
\tau
is longer than a day), as it is the typical
variation in magnitude seen from one day to the next. The
power of
вҲ’
1
/
2
-1/2
in the units arises because these
changes accumulate over time as a random walk, rather than linearly.
Finally, the jitter prior makes it very likely to be between
0.001 and 0.1 magnitudes.
On the other hand,
the flat priors we chose are given by
Ој
\displaystyle\mu
вҲј
Uniform
вҖӢ
(
15
,
25
)
\displaystyle\sim\textnormal{Uniform}(15,25)
(16)
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
\displaystyle\log_{10}(\sigma)
вҲј
Uniform
вҖӢ
(
вҲ’
3
,
1
)
\displaystyle\sim\textnormal{Uniform}(-3,1)
(17)
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\displaystyle\log_{10}(\eta)
вҲј
Uniform
вҖӢ
(
вҲ’
5
,
0
)
\displaystyle\sim\textnormal{Uniform}(-5,0)
(18)
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
)
\displaystyle\log_{10}({\rm jitter})
вҲј
Uniform
вҖӢ
(
вҲ’
3
,
вҲ’
1
)
.
\displaystyle\sim\textnormal{Uniform}(-3,-1).
(19)
The range for the mean magnitude
Ој
\mu
comfortably covers a plausible range
for quasars, with some leakage into implausible values, which is common
with flat priors. For the long term standard deviation parameter
Пғ
\sigma
,
we allow it to be between a very small lower limit of
10
вҲ’
3
10^{-3}
magnitudes
and a very large upper limit of
10
10
magnitudes, with a log-uniform prior.
For the short term volatility parameter
О·
\eta
, the prior allows for
values down to
10
вҲ’
5
10^{-5}
(very tiny magnitude deviations over
вҲј
\sim
days),
up to
1
1
(extreme magnitude deviations on a daily basis), with a log-uniform
prior. The jitter is allowed to be between
10
вҲ’
3
10^{-3}
magnitudes and 0.1
magnitudes, again with a log-uniform prior.
The induced priors for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
, now a derived parameter, in the informative and flat cases are shown in Figure
1
.
In the informative case, the prior is very close to a normal
distribution (if our informative priors had been normal, this one
would be too, and our logistic priors approximate this).
Its mean is about 3.3 (corresponding to a prior median of about
2000 days) and its standard deviation is about 1.6 dex.
In the flat prior case, the derived prior for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
is broader and is, in fact, a trapezoidal shape. Its mean is also about 3.3
and its standard deviation is about 3.7 dex.
There is some leakage of the
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
prior to implausibly small (sub-day) values, but this often occurs
with conservative prior choices. Very large values above a million
years (
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
вүі
8.6
\log_{10}(\tau)\gtrsim 8.6
) are possible with a modest
prior probability.
FIGURE 1:
The induced prior distributions for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
(with
П„
\tau
measured in days)
with the informative priors (very close to a normal distribution) and the
flat priors. Both priors cover several orders of magnitude,
with the flat prior case being wider, as expected. For reference,
10
5
10^{5}
days is 273 years, and
10
10
10^{10}
days is 27.3 million years.
3
The Posterior Distribution from a Single Light Curve
We will now demonstrate the main difficulties with inferring
the CAR(1) parameters
рқңҪ
=
{
Ој
,
Пғ
,
О·
,
jitter
}
\boldsymbol{\theta}=\{\mu,\sigma,\eta,{\rm jitter}\}
,
and hence the derived timescale parameter
П„
\tau
, from the data
рқ’ҡ
\boldsymbol{y}
.
A key issue in this kind of inference is whether the parameter
Ој
\mu
is fixed at an estimated value (or equivalently, set to zero
after subtracting an estimated value from
рқ’ҡ
\boldsymbol{y}
),
or remains a truly free parameter.
If it is fixed at an estimated value, this is often the arithmetic mean
Ој
^
\displaystyle\hat{\mu}
=
1
N
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
i
=
1
N
y
i
\displaystyle=\frac{1}{N}\sum_{i=1}^{N}y_{i}
(20)
or a weighted mean using the error bars
Ој
^
\displaystyle\hat{\mu}
=
вҲ‘
i
=
1
N
(
y
i
/
s
i
2
)
вҲ‘
i
=
1
N
(
1
/
s
i
2
)
.
\displaystyle=\frac{\sum_{i=1}^{N}\left(y_{i}/s_{i}^{2}\right)}{\sum_{i=1}^{N}\left(1/s_{i}^{2}\right)}.
(21)
Note that fixing
Ој
\mu
to an estimate
Ој
^
\hat{\mu}
is equivalent to
subtracting an estimate from
рқ’ҡ
\boldsymbol{y}
and then assuming
Ој
=
0
\mu=0
.
In this section, we show an example with a simulated light curve
where the true parameter values are known,
to illustrate the difference this decision (keeping
Ој
\mu
free vs.
fixing it at a point estimate) can make.
Figure
2
shows an example of a light curve
рқ’ҡ
\boldsymbol{y}
generated from a CAR(1) process and measured with
N
=
250
N=250
observations over a 20 year observation period, shown
as blue points. The duration and the number of data points in the
simulated dataset is comparable to the extent of the light curves
in S22.
For this simulated dataset, the true values of the parameters
were
{
Ој
,
Пғ
,
О·
,
jitter
}
=
{
20.15
,
0.992
,
0.0181
,
0.0064
}
\{\mu,\sigma,\eta,{\rm jitter}\}=\{20.15,0.992,0.0181,0.0064\}
with a corresponding timescale of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
=
3.779
\log_{10}(\tau)=3.779
(about 6000 days or 16.5 years).
FIGURE 2:
Top panel: Simulated light curve measurements
generated from a CAR(1) model with additive gaussian noise.
Naively, the data seem to indicate that
Ој
вүҲ
19.5
\mu\approx 19.5
and
Пғ
вүҲ
0.3
\sigma\approx 0.3
.
Bottom panel: The same simulated measurements (blue)
but zoomed out, showing the true curve (red) from which
the measurements were taken. In reality, the
values of
Пғ
\sigma
and
П„
\tau
are much larger than the
data would naively suggest, and the value of
Ој
\mu
could easily be quite
different from 19.5 (it was in fact 20.2). The true value of
П„
\tau
is around 6000 days.
Despite the nontrivial number of measurements in the simulated
dataset, the posterior distribution indicates that it is
compatible with a wide range of possible values of the
parameters, as the marginal posterior distributions are
very broad. Corner plots based on the informative and the
flat priors are shown in Figure
3
.
While the computation was
done in the
(
Ој
,
Пғ
,
О·
,
jitter
)
(\mu,\sigma,\eta,{\rm jitter})
coordinate system,
we transformed back to
(
Ој
,
П„
,
О·
,
jitter
)
(\mu,\tau,\eta,{\rm jitter})
for these corner plots, since
П„
\tau
is of particular interest.
The marginal posterior distributions
for all parameters apart from
О·
\eta
are very broad.
The marginal posterior distribution for
Ој
\mu
does peak near
the average of the observations, however, values that depart
from the average of the observations are still somewhat plausible,
especially under the flat priors.
The
joint distributions show that, as
П„
\tau
increases,
the uncertainty about
Ој
\mu
gets larger (as shown by the
characteristic funnel shape in the joint posterior for
Ој
\mu
and
П„
\tau
, which is more exaggerated under the flat
priors), and a wide range
of
Пғ
\sigma
and
П„
\tau
values remains plausible.
Indeed, values of
П„
\tau
much larger than the observation window
remain plausible, and were in fact true when we generated the
data.
Generally speaking, light curves like this one can be explained by moderate
П„
\tau
values (of order the duration of the observations, or somewhat less)
and
Ој
\mu
being close to the average of the data. However,
they can also be explained by having a large timescale
П„
\tau
,
a much larger value of
Пғ
\sigma
than the data naively suggests,
and a significantly different value of
Ој
\mu
than what the
data naively suggests. This phenomenon is not particular to this
simulated dataset, but occurs over a wide range of parameter space.
Fixing
Ој
\mu
to a point estimate (e.g. using Equation
21
),
rather than keeping it as a free parameter, may appear to resolve the issue
of the broad posterior distribution for
П„
\tau
.
However, this is an artificial resolution, as we do not in fact know that
Ој
=
Ој
^
\mu=\hat{\mu}
, and we should acknowledge this in our assumptions.
In Figure
4
, the posterior distributions
for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
for the simulated dataset are shown under
four distinct inference settings. In the first panel the informative
priors were used (with the
Ој
\mu
parameter free and then fixed using Equation
21
),
and in the second panel the flat priors were used
(with the
Ој
\mu
parameter free and then fixed).
As expected, the posterior distributions are narrower when
the informative priors are used (the posterior standard deviations
are 0.46 and 0.31 for the informative priors under free/fixed
Ој
\mu
respectively, and 0.90 and 0.48 for the flat priors under free/fixed
Ој
\mu
assumptions). However, in
the case of this simulated dataset, the probability density
at the true value is higher for the free
Ој
\mu
assumption
than for fixed
Ој
\mu
assumption, indicating better performance
(in an ex post sense) when keeping
Ој
\mu
free, at least for this
dataset.
This improved performance from keeping
Ој
\mu
free
would not be universally true across
all possible datasets, but is true on average over possible
datasets, as discussed in Section
5
.
In Figure
5
, we show the equivalent
plot of the posterior distributions for the volatility
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
under the two different priors and the two different
treatments of
Ој
\mu
. In all cases, the posterior for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
is narrow and the probability density at the known
true value is high. The four posterior standard deviations
for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
are all 0.025, to two significant figures.
For completeness, the estimated marginal likelihood for the simulated
dataset under the informative priors (with
Ој
\mu
free) is
log
вҒЎ
(
Z
)
=
377.58
\log(Z)=377.58
, and for the flat priors it is lower, as expected,
with
log
вҒЎ
(
Z
)
=
376.27
\log(Z)=376.27
.
FIGURE 3:
Corner plots of the posterior distribution for
Ој
\mu
,
П„
\tau
,
О·
\eta
, and the jitter parameter
based on the simulated dataset in Figure
2
.
On the left, the posterior is obtained from the informative priors, and on the right,
from the flat priors.
Due to the funnel shaped joint posterior
for
Ој
\mu
and
П„
\tau
,
The uncertainty about
П„
\tau
is extremely large, covering a few orders
of magnitude, especially in the case of the flat priors.
Notably, the volatility parameter
О·
\eta
is well constrained in both cases.
FIGURE 4:
The marginal posterior distribution for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
for the simulated
dataset, based on fixing the mean parameter
Ој
\mu
, vs. leaving it free.
The true value is indicated by the vertical line. The posterior density at
the true value is, in this case, higher when
Ој
\mu
is allowed to be a free parameter. This is not true for all possible datasets, but is true
in expectation (i.e., averaging over possible datasets), as shown
in Section
5
.
FIGURE 5:
The same as Figure
4
, but for the
volatility
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
instead of the timescale
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
.
Under both choices of prior, and under both treatements of the
Ој
\mu
parameter, the posterior distribution is narrow and the density at the
true value is high.
4
Information Theory
In the previous section, we identified two important properties of the
posterior distribution for the CAR(1) parameters
given a particular simulated dataset:
(i)
The marginal posterior distribution for the timescale
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
,
evaluated at the true value, was higher when
Ој
\mu
was kept free,
compared to when it was fixed at a point estimate.
(ii)
The marginal posterior distribution for the short term
volatility parameter
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
was very narrow compared to the marginal posterior distributions for the
other parameters.
In this section, we use information theory to test whether these
conclusions generalise to all possible datasets, as defined by the
prior predictive distribution over datasets
p
вҖӢ
(
рқ’ҡ
)
\displaystyle p(\boldsymbol{y})
=
вҲ«
p
вҖӢ
(
рқңҪ
)
вҖӢ
p
вҖӢ
(
рқ’ҡ
|
рқңҪ
)
вҖӢ
рқ‘‘
рқңҪ
.
\displaystyle=\int p(\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{y}\,|\,\boldsymbol{\theta})\,d\boldsymbol{\theta}.
(22)
Note that this is the exact equation previously given
for the marginal likelihood (Equation
2
).
This is a quirk of the traditional overloaded notation.
The marginal likelihood is, in fact, the prior predictive distribution
evaluated at the observed data.
This is directly analogous to how the sampling distribution
and the likelihood function
share the same notation, but the latter
is obtained by evaluating the former at the actually observed data.
Information theory can be used within a probabilistic context to quantify
uncertainty and relevance
(Knuth,
2005b
,
a
)
. The fundamental quantities
in information theory are entropies and relative entropies (or Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergences).
For a discrete probability distribution
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
p(\theta)
,
the Shannon entropy
(Shannon,
1948
)
is defined as
H
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
=
вҲ’
вҲ‘
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
вҖӢ
log
вҒЎ
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
,
\displaystyle H(\theta)=-\sum p(\theta)\log p(\theta),
(23)
where the sum is over the set of mutually exclusive and exhaustive
possibilities for
Оё
\theta
. This expression measures the amount of
uncertainty in the probability distribution. For a discrete uniform
distribution, the entropy is
log
вҒЎ
(
n
)
\log(n)
where
n
n
is the number of
possibilities.
For continuous distributions, which we use throughout this paper,
a continuous version with an integral instead of a sum
(sometimes called differential entropy) can be defined. It is given by
H
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
=
вҲ’
вҲ«
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
вҖӢ
log
вҒЎ
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
вҖӢ
рқ‘‘
Оё
.
\displaystyle H(\theta)=-\int p(\theta)\log p(\theta)\,d\theta.
(24)
However, in the continuous case the entropy must be understood
with respect to a given coordinate system вҖ” for example,
H
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
H(\theta)
and
H
(
log
Оё
)
)
H(\log\theta))
will usually be different values.
To build intuition, the entropy of a uniform distribution
with volume
V
V
is simply
log
вҒЎ
(
V
)
\log(V)
, and the entropy can be regarded
as the generalisation of log-volume to non-uniform distributions.
The fact that the continuous entropy is coordinate dependent arises
from the Jacobian factor that must be included in the volume element
when changing coordinates. However, for our purposes, we will be
concerned with volumes in a fixed coordinate (
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
and
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
) and will not need to worry about any Jacobians.
While the discrete entropy (Equation
23
) is non-negative,
the continuous version can be negative. The reason is simply that
the number of possibilities in a discrete situation cannot be less than
1, but the volume in a continuous situation can be less than 1.
In a context with an unknown parameter
Оё
\theta
and a particular dataset
D
D
, the entropy of the posterior distribution is defined as
H
\displaystyle H
=
вҲ’
вҲ«
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
|
D
)
вҖӢ
log
вҒЎ
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
|
D
)
вҖӢ
рқ‘‘
Оё
.
\displaystyle=-\int p(\theta\,|\,D)\log p(\theta\,|\,D)\,d\theta.
(25)
However, the conditional entropy, given the symbol
H
вҖӢ
(
Оё
|
D
)
H(\theta\,|\,D)
,
is actually defined by taking the expectation
over datasets,
H
вҖӢ
(
Оё
|
D
)
\displaystyle H(\theta\,|\,D)
=
вҲ’
вҲ«
p
вҖӢ
(
D
)
вҖӢ
вҲ«
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
|
D
)
вҖӢ
log
вҒЎ
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
|
D
)
вҖӢ
рқ‘‘
Оё
вҖӢ
рқ‘‘
D
.
\displaystyle=-\int p(D)\int p(\theta\,|\,D)\log p(\theta\,|\,D)\,d\theta\,dD.
(26)
This quantifies how much uncertainty would remain about
Оё
\theta
if
D
D
is taken into account, but without specifying any particular
value for
D
D
. Whereas Equation
25
is a function
of a question (вҖңwhat is the value of
Оё
\theta
?вҖқ) and a statement (вҖңthe data
was observed to be
D
D
вҖқ), Equation
26
is a function of
a question (вҖңwhat is the value of
Оё
\theta
?вҖқ) and another question
(вҖңwhat is the value of
D
D
?вҖқ).
Subsequently, we use the term posterior
entropy for Equation
25
and
conditional entropy for Equation
26
.
The mutual information may be defined as
MI
вҖӢ
(
Оё
,
D
)
\displaystyle{\rm MI}(\theta,D)
=
H
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
вҲ’
H
вҖӢ
(
Оё
|
D
)
.
\displaystyle=H(\theta)-H(\theta\,|\,D).
(27)
This is a measure of dependence, which describes
how much learning
D
D
tells us about
Оё
\theta
.
There are various identities and alternative ways of writing
the mutual information. We will not list them exhaustively,
but note that it is also the Kullback-Leibler divergence
of the joint prior distribution for
Оё
\theta
and
D
D
from the product of its marginals:
MI
вҖӢ
(
Оё
,
D
)
\displaystyle{\rm MI}(\theta,D)
=
вҲ¬
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
,
D
)
вҖӢ
log
вҒЎ
[
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
,
D
)
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
вҖӢ
p
вҖӢ
(
D
)
]
вҖӢ
рқ‘‘
Оё
вҖӢ
рқ‘‘
D
.
\displaystyle=\iint p(\theta,D)\log\left[\frac{p(\theta,D)}{p(\theta)p(D)}\right]\,d\theta\,dD.
(28)
The mutual information
is also the expected value of the prior-to-posterior
Kullback-Leibler divergence, averaged over possible datasets:
MI
вҖӢ
(
Оё
,
D
)
\displaystyle{\rm MI}(\theta,D)
=
вҲ«
p
вҖӢ
(
D
)
вҖӢ
вҲ«
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
|
D
)
вҖӢ
log
вҒЎ
[
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
|
D
)
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
]
вҖӢ
рқ‘‘
Оё
вҖӢ
рқ‘‘
D
.
\displaystyle=\int p(D)\int p(\theta\,|\,D)\log\left[\frac{p(\theta\,|\,D)}{p(\theta)}\right]\,d\theta\,dD.
(29)
This second property allows us to estimate the mutual information using
Nested Sampling
(Skilling,
2006
)
, which can calculate the prior-to-posterior
KL divergence for a particular dataset (Skilling calls this
simply the вҖҳinformationвҖҷ). However, this approach can only
give the mutual information between the data and the full parameter vector.
If we want to focus on particular parameters such as
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
and
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
, we need a method that also allows for marginalisation
over a subset of the parameters.
Thus, we used a Nested Sampling approach similar to the one introduced
by
Brewer (
2017
)
. Specifically, we used the simpler implementation
provided at
https://github.com/eggplantbren/PostEnt2026
, which is designed
to calculate conditional entropies (Equation
26
)
rather than arbitrary entropies, and which
can also marginalise over parameters, giving the conditional entropy
for only the parameter(s) of interest.
This implementation also uses Diffusive Nested Sampling for the inner loop,
which is more robust to difficult posterior distributions
than the original approach of
Brewer (
2017
)
.
Switching from generic notation
(
Оё
,
D
)
(\theta,D)
to the specific
parameters and data for our model
(
рқңҪ
,
рқ’ҡ
)
(\boldsymbol{\theta},\boldsymbol{y})
,
the algorithm simulates parameters
рқңҪ
\boldsymbol{\theta}
from the
prior and a corresponding dataset
рқ’ҡ
\boldsymbol{y}
from the sampling distribution.
Together, these constitute a (parameters, data) pair simulated from the
joint prior distribution
p
вҖӢ
(
рқңҪ
)
вҖӢ
p
вҖӢ
(
рқ’ҡ
|
рқңҪ
)
p(\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{y}\,|\,\boldsymbol{\theta})
.
It then estimates the logarithm of the posterior density given
рқ’ҡ
\boldsymbol{y}
at the true parameter value, which is known by construction. Finally,
it computes the average over all datasets.
Our simulated datasets for this section are based on
N
=
250
N=250
observations over a baseline of about 20 years, similar to the
light curves of S22.
Figure
6
shows an estimate of the posterior entropy
for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
as a function of its true value, using the informative
priors. The value plotted on the
y
y
-axis is minus the estimated log of the
posterior density at the true value, and is part of the calculation process
for
H
вҖӢ
(
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
|
рқ’ҡ
)
H(\log_{10}(\tau)\,|\,\boldsymbol{y})
. Indeed, the conditional entropy is
obtained by averaging all of the
y
y
-values in the plot.
Between
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
=
2
\log_{10}(\tau)=2
and
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
=
7
\log_{10}(\tau)=7
, a clear increasing
trend is seen, showing that
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
has a narrower posterior
distribution (lower entropy) when
П„
\tau
is shorter, as expected.
This is a Bayesian, information theoretic version of
KozЕӮowski (
2017
)
вҖҷs conclusion that
П„
\tau
is more constrained when it is short.
Below
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
=
2
\log_{10}(\tau)=2
, the typical posterior entropy becomes higher
again, as short variability timescales mean only an upper limit for
П„
\tau
is possible, and these posterior distributions do not have a low entropy.
However, due to
Ој
\mu
being a free parameter in our analysis, the typical
uncertainty is still very large. The conditional entropy of
0.929
Вұ
0.070
0.929\pm 0.070
nats is roughly equivalent to the posterior being a normal distribution with
a standard deviation of 0.6 dex (making use of the expression
for the entropy of a normal distribution, which is
H
=
1
2
вҖӢ
log
вҒЎ
(
2
вҖӢ
ПҖ
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
Пғ
2
)
H=\frac{1}{2}\log(2\pi e\sigma^{2})
),
but much of the information is coming
from the prior rather than from the data.
With the flat prior the conditional entropy is
2.063
Вұ
0.060
2.063\pm 0.060
nats,
corresponding to a normal distribution with a standard deviation of almost 2 dex.
FIGURE 6:
For 1000 simulated light curves, we estimated
the entropy of the posterior (on the
y
y
-axis), and plotted it against
the true timescale (
x
x
-axis; known because this is based on simulated
data). For
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
values above about 2, there is a clear
increasing trend, so it is indeed easier to infer
П„
\tau
if it is small relative to the duration of the observations.
This is our equivalent of
KozЕӮowski (
2017
)
вҖҷs
conclusion that
П„
\tau
should be significantly shorter than
the observation window to be well constrained.
The vertical lines indicate one day (the cadence)
and 20 years (the baseline) respectively.
On the other hand, the right hand panel of Figure
6
shows that
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
is typically very well constrained by the
data. The marginal posterior distribution has much higher probability
density at the true value, and the resulting conditional entropy is
much smaller than for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
(
вҲ’
1.859
Вұ
0.054
-1.859\pm 0.054
vs.
0.929
Вұ
0.070
0.929\pm 0.070
).
For intuition purposes, this conditional entropy is equivalent to a normal
distribution with a standard deviation of about 0.04 dex.
Our observation that
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
was much better constrained than
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
indeed generalises from the particular dataset
in Section
2
and is typical across possible datasets
generated from the joint prior distribution over parameters and datasets.
5
Logarithmic Scoring Rule
Scoring rules describe the
ex post
quality of a probability distribution, if the true value of the
unknown quantity later becomes known. Scoring rules are functions
taking the true value and the probability distribution as inputs,
and returning a real number.
The logarithmic scoring rule is the unique local, strictly proper
scoring rule. The term
local
means that the score
only depends on the probability
assigned to the true value, not to other values. The term
strictly proper
means
that if we believe in a particular probability distribution
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
p(\theta)
then asserting
p
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
p(\theta)
itself uniquely maximises the
expected value of the score
(Gneiting and Raftery,
2007
)
.
For the informative and the flat priors, the expected logarithmic
score when inferring
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
or
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
are equivalent to the conditional entropies which we calculated
in the previous section, but with a change of sign.
In Figure
4
, we saw that the posterior density
for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
at the true value was higher if we left
Ој
\mu
as a free parameter, compared to fixing it at a point estimate.
To see whether this property generalises across datasets,
we also computed the expected value of the logarithmic score
in the case where
Ој
\mu
is fixed at a point estimate.
Under the informative priors, when the goal is to infer
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
,
we find that
the expected logarithmic score is only slightly higher when keeping
Ој
\mu
free (
вҲ’
0.929
Вұ
0.070
-0.929\pm 0.070
) than when fixing
Ој
\mu
at a point estimate
(
вҲ’
0.992
Вұ
0.083
-0.992\pm 0.083
); indeed, this difference could be Monte Carlo noise.
However, under the flat priors, the difference becomes much
more dramatic.
Treating
Ој
\mu
as a free parameter gives an expected logarithmic score of
вҲ’
2.063
Вұ
0.060
-2.063\pm 0.060
,
whereas fixing it gives
вҲ’
2.936
Вұ
0.123
-2.936\pm 0.123
, so the posterior density at the
true value is almost a factor of
e
e
smaller, on average.
We did not evaluate the fixed-
Ој
\mu
strategy with respect to inference
of the short term volatility parameter
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
, as Figure
5
suggests is likely to be insensitive to this choice.
The parameter
О·
\eta
is the day-to-day variability in magnitudes, and is
well constrained in general. The expected logarithmic scores under the
free-
Ој
\mu
setting (which are just our posterior entropies
from Section
4
) with the sign
reversed) are significantly higher than for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
, as
expected.
We note that, for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
, the conditional entropy is significantly
lower for the informative priors than for the flat priors. This is because
the flat priors allow some datasets with very short timescales
П„
\tau
(Figure
1
), for which
the uncertainty for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
becomes quite large.
However, this region of parameter space is not really as plausible as
the flat prior suggests.
A summary table of information theoretic quantities and expected
logarithmic scores is displayed in Table
1
.
For completeness, we also calculated the mutual informations which
are the differences between the prior and posterior entropies, and quantify
how much information the data provides about the parameter of interest.
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
Priors
Treatment of
Ој
\mu
Prior Entropy
Conditional Entropy
Mutual Information
Expected Logarithmic Score
Informative
Free
1.957
Вұ
\pm
0.039
0.929
Вұ
\pm
0.070
1.028
Вұ
\pm
0.080
-0.929
Вұ
\pm
0.070
Informative
Fixed fixed
1.957
Вұ
\pm
0.039
-0.992
Вұ
\pm
0.083
Flat
Free
2.849
Вұ
\pm
0.037
2.063
Вұ
\pm
0.060
0.786
Вұ
\pm
0.070
-2.063
Вұ
\pm
0.060
Flat
Fixed
Ој
\mu
2.849
Вұ
\pm
0.037
-2.936
Вұ
\pm
0.123
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
Priors
Treatment of
Ој
\mu
Prior Entropy
Conditional Entropy
Mutual Information
Expected Logarithmic Score
Informative
Free
0.891
-1.859
Вұ
\pm
0.054
2.750
Вұ
\pm
0.054
1.859
Вұ
\pm
0.054
Flat
Free
1.609
0.146
Вұ
\pm
0.111
1.463
Вұ
\pm
0.111
-0.146
Вұ
\pm
0.111
TABLE 1:
Table of information theoretic quantities regarding inference
of the timescale
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
and the volatility
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
under different
assumptions (informative/flat priors, and free/fixed
Ој
\mu
strategies).
The conditional entropy describes the typical
amount known about
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
after conditioning on the data.
All values are based on
N
=
250
N=250
observations over 20 years.
6
Hierarchical Analysis
Having established that
П„
\tau
is very difficult to infer when
Ој
\mu
is a free parameter, and that
Ој
\mu
actually
should
be a free parameter,
we now turn to the question of what we should do given this reality.
Since the short term volatility
О·
\eta
is much more well constrained by
light curve data, it is likely
that focusing on
О·
\eta
instead of
П„
\tau
could be a fruitful line of investigation.
In this section, we present an initial hierarchical analysis as a proof of
concept of this strategy. We note that in his seminal paper on this topic,
Kelly
et al.
(
2009
)
did perform some regressions with
Пғ
\sigma
(corresponding to our
О·
\eta
, not our
Пғ
\sigma
) with respect to luminosity,
black hole mass and Eddington ratio. However, later studies have overwhelmingly
emphasised
П„
\tau
(e.g. Suberlak
et al.
,
2021
; Burke
et al.
,
2021
)
.
This might partially be caused by the increased popularity of the Gaussian process formalism,
where
Пғ
\sigma
is usually preferred, over the stochastic differential equation
formalism which in which
О·
\eta
occurs naturally.
Our analysis differs in that we identify
О·
\eta
as the only well-constrained
parameter under realistic observing conditions and build a hierarchical
population model specifically for it.
The dataset is from S22 and consists of light curves for 190 quasars,
each measured in three bands (
g
g
,
r
r
, and
i
i
) over a period of 20 years.
We computed the rest-frame wavelengths of the observations in each band
using
О»
g
\displaystyle\lambda_{g}
=
4720
вҖӢ
A
МҠ
1
+
z
\displaystyle=\frac{4720\mathring{\mathrm{A}}}{1+z}
(30)
О»
r
\displaystyle\lambda_{r}
=
6415
вҖӢ
A
МҠ
1
+
z
\displaystyle=\frac{6415\mathring{\mathrm{A}}}{1+z}
(31)
О»
i
\displaystyle\lambda_{i}
=
7835
вҖӢ
A
МҠ
1
+
z
.
\displaystyle=\frac{7835\mathring{\mathrm{A}}}{1+z}.
(32)
Previous studies used the
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
estimates from S22
as the response variable in a regression model, in order
to detect the expected time dilation signal,
in the form of a term
n
вҖӢ
log
10
вҒЎ
(
1
+
z
)
n\log_{10}(1+z)
, where
n
=
1
n=1
implies a pure cosmological time dilation signal with no intrinsic evolution
in quasar properties over time
(Lewis and Brewer,
2023
; Brewer
et al.
,
2025
)
. However, here
we will make two changes. Firstly, we will treat
О·
\eta
as the
response variable in our regression model, not
П„
\tau
.
Secondly, rather than estimating
О·
\eta
for each light curve and treating
that output as data, we will build a model whose likelihood function
is based on the light curves themselves. While computationally much more intensive,
this approach avoids some philosophical and practical difficulties.
Treating posterior distributions (i.e., inferred
О·
\eta
or
П„
\tau
values
and their uncertainties) as if they were вҖҳdataвҖҷ, or even likelihood functions,
is a subtle issue
(Hogg,
2018
)
.
Also, both
Lewis and Brewer (
2023
)
and
Brewer
et al.
(
2025
)
had to adopt unconventional asymmetric probability distributions
to deal with the asymmetric uncertainties on
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
reported by S22. Using the raw light curves means that
our results will reflect the actual shape of the likelihood function,
rather than an approximate shape reconstructed from
published credible intervals. However, since the posterior distributions
for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
from individual light curves are usually
narrow normal distributions (unlike posterior distributions for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
), this choice is unlikely to have a major numerical
impact on the results.
6.1
Data Cleaning
Some of the light curves in the S22 dataset, largely in the
r
r
and
i
i
band
light curves, contain discrepant
magnitude measurements which are clearly unreliable, with
a reported unphysical magnitude of
вҲ’
44
-44
. Such points
must be discarded, but there are other points which
are less extreme which may not be accurate as they suddenly
deviate from the overall trend of the light curve.
These points have two main effects on the posterior distributions
for the CAR(1) parameters. The model has two main ways of
explaining how such a discrepant point could have occurred.
The first is by increasing the jitter term and explaining the
discrepant point as a white noise fluctuation. The second is
to reduce the value of
П„
\tau
, which has a similar effect,
making the CAR(1) process more similar to a white noise
distribution.
Before running the inferences, the previous analyses
ran the light curves through a Hampel filter
(Pearson
et al.
,
2015
)
to remove outliers
(Stone, priv. comm).
We adopted a simpler approach of discarding any measurement
that was more than 5 times the interquartile range away
from the median value of the light curve.
Using this approach, a total of 18 outliers were removed,
across 13 out of the 570 light curves.
A more principled treatment of these discrepant measurements
could be developed involving a heavy-tailed noise model, however,
such an approach is beyond the scope of this paper.
6.2
Model Specification
Our hierarchical model aims to simultaneously infer the four CAR(1) quantities
for each of the
190
Г—
3
190\times 3
light curves:
(
Ој
i
вҖӢ
j
,
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
i
вҖӢ
j
)
,
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
i
вҖӢ
j
)
,
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
i
вҖӢ
j
)
)
,
\displaystyle\left(\mu_{ij},\log_{10}(\sigma_{ij}),\log_{10}(\eta_{ij}),\log_{10}(\textnormal{jitter}_{ij})\right),
(33)
where
i
вҲҲ
{
1
,
вҖҰ
,
190
}
i\in\{1,...,190\}
indexes the quasars and
and
j
вҲҲ
{
g
,
r
,
i
}
j\in\{g,r,i\}
indexes the waveband of the observations.
We use hierarchical priors, so that the inference is allowed to
borrow strength across light curves вҖ” for instance, if the
data suggests
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
\log_{10}(\sigma)
clusters around a typical value
for many light curves,
that clustering will provide information that is relevant
to inference of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
\log_{10}(\sigma)
for the other light curves.
This requires the introduction of hyperparameters, describing concepts
such as вҖҳthe typical value of
Ој
\mu
across all light curvesвҖҷ,
the вҖҳdiversity of
Ој
\mu
across all light curvesвҖҷ, and so on.
The entire model specification including priors for the hyperparameters,
the parameters, and the data, is given in Table
2
.
There are 11 hyperparameters and 2280 (
=
190
Г—
3
Г—
4
=190\times 3\times 4
) parameters,
for a total of 2291 unknowns.
We use
m
m
to denote hyperparameters that are means and
Пү
\omega
for hyperparameters
that are standard deviations, with subscripts to indicate which quantity
the mean and standard deviation applies to (e.g.,
m
Ој
m_{\mu}
and
Пү
Ој
\omega_{\mu}
describe the mean and standard deviation of magnitude parameters
Ој
\mu
across
all light curves).
The prior for all individual light curve parameters is based on the appropriate
hyperparameters, and we use normal distributions for this purpose.
However,
О·
\eta
is treated differently from the other parameters, and we
apply a regression assumption for the expected value of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
,
based on its expected dependence on
explanatory variables, namely the bolometric luminosity
L
bol
L_{\rm bol}
of the
quasar (in ergs per second),
the rest wavelength
О»
\lambda
of the light curve (in Angstroms),
and the redshift
z
z
of the quasar.
The regression model is based on centered explanatory variables,
given by
О»
i
вҖӢ
j
вҖІ
\displaystyle\lambda^{\prime}_{ij}
=
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О»
i
вҖӢ
j
)
вҲ’
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О»
)
ВҜ
\displaystyle=\log_{10}(\lambda_{ij})-\overline{\log_{10}(\lambda)}
(34)
L
bol
,
i
вҖІ
\displaystyle L^{\prime}_{{\rm bol},i}
=
log
10
вҒЎ
(
L
bol
,
i
)
вҲ’
log
10
вҒЎ
(
L
bol
)
ВҜ
\displaystyle=\log_{10}(L_{{\rm bol},i})-\overline{\log_{10}(L_{\rm bol})}
(35)
z
i
вҖІ
\displaystyle z^{\prime}_{i}
=
log
10
вҒЎ
(
1
+
z
i
)
вҲ’
log
10
вҒЎ
(
1
+
z
)
ВҜ
,
\displaystyle=\log_{10}(1+z_{i})-\overline{\log_{10}(1+z)},
(36)
where the overbar denotes the arithmetic mean.
This choice is traditional in Bayesian regression modelling
and tends to make the posterior distribution for the coefficients
more independent (improving computational efficiency), and also changes
the interpretation of
ОІ
0
\beta_{0}
, which becomes the typical value for
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
at a typical bolometric luminosity, rest wavelength, and
redshift. The numerical values of the arithmetic means for the actual data
are
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О»
)
ВҜ
\displaystyle\overline{\log_{10}(\lambda)}
=
3.378
\displaystyle=3.378
(37)
log
10
вҒЎ
(
L
bol
)
ВҜ
\displaystyle\overline{\log_{10}(L_{\rm bol})}
=
46.16
\displaystyle=46.16
(38)
log
10
вҒЎ
(
1
+
z
)
ВҜ
\displaystyle\overline{\log_{10}(1+z)}
=
0.4134
.
\displaystyle=0.4134.
(39)
The expected value of the log of the volatility,
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
,
for the regression model is then given by
ОІ
0
+
ОІ
1
вҖӢ
О»
i
вҖӢ
j
вҖІ
+
ОІ
2
вҖӢ
L
bol
,
i
вҖІ
+
ОІ
3
вҖӢ
z
i
вҖІ
.
\displaystyle\beta_{0}+\beta_{1}\lambda^{\prime}_{ij}+\beta_{2}L^{\prime}_{{\rm bol},i}+\beta_{3}z^{\prime}_{i}.
(40)
In this proof of concept analysis, we do not perform variable selection or explore additional explanatory variables such as black hole mass or Eddington ratio, nor do we include nonlinear terms in the regression surface. While scientifically interesting, these extensions would require a substantially more complex hierarchical model вҖ” especially if accounting for uncertainty in the explanatory variables вҖ” and would dilute the focus of this study.
6.3
Priors
The priors for all hyperparameters were chosen to be uniform distributions for
simplicity. The limits of the uniform distributions for the
m
m
hyperparameters,
describing typical values of
(
Ој
,
Пғ
,
О·
,
jitter
)
(\mu,\sigma,\eta,{\rm jitter})
across the sample,
correspond to the limits
in the flat priors described in Section
2
. For example,
we previously set the prior for
Ој
\mu
for an single light curve to be Uniform
(
15
,
25
)
(15,25)
,
and now we use that same prior for
m
Ој
m_{\mu}
, the typical value of
Ој
\mu
across
all light curves. The same logic has been applied to the
m
m
hyperparameters
for the typical values of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
\log_{10}(\sigma)
,
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
,
and
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
)
\log_{10}({\rm jitter})
.
For the regression coefficients
ОІ
0
\beta_{0}
,
ОІ
1
\beta_{1}
, and
ОІ
2
\beta_{2}
, we set
the prior limits by considering their effect on the response variable
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
. The range of all explanatory variables (
log
10
вҒЎ
(
L
bol
)
\log_{10}(L_{\rm bol})
,
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О»
)
\log_{10}(\lambda)
, and
log
10
вҒЎ
(
1
+
z
)
\log_{10}(1+z)
) is roughly unity,
so our prior limits of
Вұ
10
\pm 10
imply that these could cause variations of
about
Вұ
10
\pm 10
in the response variable
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
.
Thus, these bounds are generously wide
and should not be increased as this would simply include more extreme implausible
values in the prior distribution.
The lower limit for standard deviation hyperparameters
Пү
\omega
was set to zero and the upper limits were set to 5. Realistically, lower
values are more plausible and values approaching 5 are extremely implausible,
as they would imply that the individual light curve parameters are scattered
across a massive range. However, we did not attempt to incorporate this kind
of prior judgment into the analysis explicitly.
More elaborate hierarchical structures вҖ” for example, allowing
Ој
\mu
or
Пғ
\sigma
to depend on quasar properties вҖ” are certainly possible,
but we regard them as beyond the scope of this work, whose aim is specifically to
investigate how the volatility
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
may depend on these quantities.
Finally, the likelihood function is given by the product of the Gaussian Process
likelihood (Equation
3
) over the 570 light curves.
Quantity
Meaning
Prior
Hyperparameters
m
Ој
m_{\mu}
Typical value of
Ој
\mu
across light curves
Uniform
(
15
,
25
)
(15,25)
Пү
Ој
\omega_{\mu}
Diversity of
Ој
\mu
across light curves
Uniform
(
0
,
5
)
(0,5)
m
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
m_{\log_{10}(\sigma)}
Typical value of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
\log_{10}(\sigma)
across light curves
Uniform
(
вҲ’
3
,
1
)
(-3,1)
Пү
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
\omega_{\log_{10}(\sigma)}
Diversity of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
\log_{10}(\sigma)
across light curves
Uniform
(
0
,
5
)
(0,5)
ОІ
0
\beta_{0}
Typical value of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
across light curves
Uniform
(
вҲ’
5
,
5
)
(-5,5)
ОІ
1
\beta_{1}
Coefficient of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О»
)
\log_{10}(\lambda)
in predicting
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
Uniform
(
вҲ’
10
,
10
)
(-10,10)
ОІ
2
\beta_{2}
Coefficient of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
L
bol
)
\log_{10}(L_{\rm bol})
in predicting
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
Uniform
(
вҲ’
10
,
10
)
(-10,10)
ОІ
3
\beta_{3}
Coefficient of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
1
+
z
)
\log_{10}(1+z)
in predicting
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
Uniform
(
вҲ’
3
,
3
)
(-3,3)
Пү
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\omega_{\log_{10}(\eta)}
Diversity of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
around regression model
Uniform
(
0
,
5
)
(0,5)
m
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
)
m_{\log_{10}({\rm jitter})}
Typical value of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
)
\log_{10}({\rm jitter})
across light curves
Uniform
(
вҲ’
3
,
вҲ’
1
)
(-3,-1)
Пү
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
)
\omega_{\log_{10}({\rm jitter})}
Diversity of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
)
\log_{10}({\rm jitter})
across light curves
Uniform
(
0
,
5
)
(0,5)
Parameters
Ој
i
вҖӢ
j
\mu_{ij}
Mean magnitude of quasar
i
i
in band
j
j
Normal
(
m
Ој
,
Пү
Ој
2
)
(m_{\mu},\omega_{\mu}^{2})
Пғ
i
вҖӢ
j
\sigma_{ij}
Variability amplitude of quasar
i
i
in band
j
j
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
i
вҖӢ
j
)
вҲј
Normal
вҖӢ
(
m
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
,
Пү
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
2
)
\log_{10}(\sigma_{ij})\sim\textnormal{Normal}\left(m_{\log_{10}(\sigma)},\omega_{\log_{10}(\sigma)}^{2}\right)
О·
i
вҖӢ
j
\eta_{ij}
Short term volatility of quasar
i
i
in band
j
j
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
i
вҖӢ
j
)
вҲј
Normal
вҖӢ
(
ОІ
0
+
ОІ
1
вҖӢ
О»
i
вҖӢ
j
вҖІ
+
ОІ
2
вҖӢ
L
bol
,
i
вҖІ
+
n
вҖӢ
z
i
вҖІ
,
Пү
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
2
)
\log_{10}(\eta_{ij})\sim\textnormal{Normal}\left(\beta_{0}+\beta_{1}\lambda^{\prime}_{ij}+\beta_{2}L^{\prime}_{{\rm bol},i}+nz^{\prime}_{i},\omega_{\log_{10}(\eta)}^{2}\right)
jitter
i
вҖӢ
j
{\rm jitter}_{ij}
Jitter of quasar
i
i
in band
j
j
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
i
вҖӢ
j
)
вҲј
Normal
вҖӢ
(
m
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
)
,
Пү
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
)
2
)
\log_{10}({\rm jitter}_{ij})\sim\textnormal{Normal}\left(m_{\log_{10}({\rm jitter})},\omega_{\log_{10}({\rm jitter})}^{2}\right)
Data
рқ’ҡ
i
вҖӢ
j
\boldsymbol{y}_{ij}
Light curve for quasar
i
i
in band
j
j
GaussianProcess
(
Ој
i
вҖӢ
j
,
Пғ
i
вҖӢ
j
,
О·
i
вҖӢ
j
,
jitter
i
вҖӢ
j
)
(\mu_{ij},\sigma_{ij},\eta_{ij},{\rm jitter}_{ij})
(Equation
3
)
Prior Information
рқ’•
i
вҖӢ
j
\boldsymbol{t}_{ij}
Timestamps for quasar
i
i
in band
j
j
Values known
рқ’”
i
вҖӢ
j
\boldsymbol{s}_{ij}
Error bars for quasar
i
i
in band
j
j
Values known
L
bol
,
i
L_{{\rm bol},i}
Bolometric luminosity for quasar
i
i
Values known
О»
i
вҖӢ
j
\lambda_{ij}
Rest wavelength of quasar
i
i
in band
j
j
Values known
z
i
z_{i}
Redshift of quasar
i
i
Values known
TABLE 2:
The complete definition of our hierarchical regression model
which aims to predict
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
as a function of
rest wavelength, bolometric luminosity, and redshift.
For all hyperparameters, uniform priors were used for simplicity.
The limits on the uniform priors are chosen to be represent physically plausible
values.
6.4
Results
Posterior summaries for the 11 hyperparameters are presented in
Table
3
. All of the marginal posterior
distributions for the hyperparameters were approximately normal, so we
simply summarised them using the mean
Вұ
\pm
the standard deviation.
A corner plot for some of the hyperparameters is also shown in
Figure
7
.
FIGURE 7:
A corner plot of a subset of the hyperparameters of the
hierarchical model, particularly, those hyperparameters describing the
relationship between the explanatory variables (rest wavelength and
bolometric luminosity) and the quasar volatility. As a reminder,
ОІ
0
\beta_{0}
is the baseline value of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
,
ОІ
1
\beta_{1}
and
ОІ
2
\beta_{2}
are the coefficients of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О»
)
\log_{10}(\lambda)
and
log
10
вҒЎ
(
L
bol
)
\log_{10}(L_{\rm bol})
respectively, and
ОІ
3
\beta_{3}
is the coefficient
of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
1
+
z
)
\log_{10}(1+z)
. Finally,
s
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
s_{\log_{10}(\eta)}
describes the
dispersion of volatility values around the regression surface.
Hyperparameter
Meaning
Value
m
Ој
m_{\mu}
Typical value of
Ој
\mu
across light curves
19.895
Вұ
0.028
19.895\pm 0.028
Пү
Ој
\omega_{\mu}
Diversity of
Ој
\mu
across light curves
0.34
Вұ
0.13
0.34\pm 0.13
m
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
m_{\log_{10}(\sigma)}
Typical value of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
\log_{10}(\sigma)
across light curves
вҲ’
0.337
Вұ
0.069
-0.337\pm 0.069
Пү
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
\omega_{\log_{10}(\sigma)}
Diversity of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
\log_{10}(\sigma)
across light curves
0.229
Вұ
0.033
0.229\pm 0.033
ОІ
0
\beta_{0}
Typical value of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
across light curves
вҲ’
2.2192
Вұ
0.0027
-2.2192\pm 0.0027
ОІ
1
\beta_{1}
Coefficient of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О»
)
\log_{10}(\lambda)
in predicting
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
вҲ’
0.824
Вұ
0.044
-0.824\pm 0.044
ОІ
2
\beta_{2}
Coefficient of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
L
bol
)
\log_{10}(L_{\rm bol})
in predicting
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
вҲ’
0.297
Вұ
0.018
-0.297\pm 0.018
ОІ
3
\beta_{3}
Coefficient of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
1
+
z
)
\log_{10}(1+z)
in predicting
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
вҲ’
0.677
Вұ
0.055
-0.677\pm 0.055
Пү
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\omega_{\log_{10}(\eta)}
Diversity of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
around regression model
0.1006
Вұ
0.0031
0.1006\pm 0.0031
m
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
)
m_{\log_{10}({\rm jitter})}
Typical value of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
)
\log_{10}({\rm jitter})
across light curves
вҲ’
2.653
Вұ
0.057
-2.653\pm 0.057
Пү
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
)
\omega_{\log_{10}({\rm jitter})}
Diversity of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
)
\log_{10}({\rm jitter})
across light curves
0.721
Вұ
0.049
0.721\pm 0.049
TABLE 3:
Posterior summaries for the 11 hyperparameters of the hierarchical model.
The meaning column is duplicated
from Table
2
for convenience.
The typical value of the mean magnitude
Ој
\mu
is estimated to be
m
Ој
=
19.895
Вұ
0.028
m_{\mu}=19.895\pm 0.028
, and the diversity hyperparameter for the mean magnitudes
is
Пү
Ој
=
0.34
Вұ
0.13
\omega_{\mu}=0.34\pm 0.13
. These probably reflect selection effects in how
quasars come to be included in the sample, as opposed to being a literal
description of the properties of all quasars.
The typical value of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
\log_{10}(\sigma)
across light curves is estimated to
be
m
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
=
вҲ’
0.337
Вұ
0.13
m_{\log_{10}(\sigma)}=-0.337\pm 0.13
, and the diversity is
Пү
log
10
вҒЎ
(
Пғ
)
=
0.229
Вұ
0.033
\omega_{\log_{10}(\sigma)}=0.229\pm 0.033
. Interestingly, the aggregated information from
all light curves in the sample has constrained both of these hyperparameters to low values. Presumably, if quasars really did show massive variability
that only shows up over very long timescales,
we would have seen large excursions in
some
of the light curves in the sample вҖ” but we do not.
This also provides a path towards inferring
П„
\tau
, if it remains of particular
scientific interest. However, instead of trying to infer it for individual
light curves (which provide very little information about
П„
\tau
),
many light curves can be used simultaneously, and the inference about
П„
\tau
for light curve
i
i
will also be informed by the data for light
curve
j
вү 
i
j\neq i
, in the usual hierarchical fashion.
The idea of using hierarchical models to pool information across objects,
where individual objectsвҖҷ properties are not well constrained,
has been explored previously in many astronomical fields, such
as extrasolar planets
(Hogg
et al.
,
2010
)
and
reverberation mapping
(Brewer and Elliott,
2014
)
.
As a simple demonstration, we computed the posterior distribution
over the arithmetic mean and sample standard deviation of all
570
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
values, which can be derived from the model
parameters. The arithmetic mean is
4.06
Вұ
0.14
4.06\pm 0.14
(corresponding
to about 31 years) and the standard deviation
is
0.596
Вұ
0.053
0.596\pm 0.053
.
The hyperparameter
ОІ
0
\beta_{0}
, which describes the typical volatility
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
in magnitudes per day
1/2
, is estimated to be
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
=
вҲ’
2.2192
Вұ
0.0027
\log_{10}(\eta)=-2.2192\pm 0.0027
. However,
since we centered the explanatory variables,
ОІ
0
\beta_{0}
corresponds to the
typical value of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
at a typical redshift (1.59).
To compute the typical value of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
in the rest frame,
we use
ОІ
0
вҖІ
\displaystyle\beta_{0}^{\prime}
=
ОІ
0
вҲ’
ОІ
3
вҖӢ
log
10
вҒЎ
(
1
+
z
)
ВҜ
\displaystyle=\beta_{0}-\beta_{3}\ \overline{\log_{10}(1+z)}
(41)
=
ОІ
0
вҲ’
0.4134
вҖӢ
ОІ
3
,
\displaystyle=\beta_{0}-0.4134\beta_{3},
(42)
and the result is
ОІ
0
вҖІ
=
вҲ’
1.939
Вұ
0.023
\beta_{0}^{\prime}=-1.939\pm 0.023
. This implies that,
in the rest frame, quasars typically
vary in magnitude by about
0.012
0.012
magnitudes per day
1/2
.
The coefficients
ОІ
1
\beta_{1}
and
ОІ
2
\beta_{2}
are both negative, indicating that
volatility decreases as a function of both rest wavelength (i.e., quasars
are more volatile at the blue end of the spectrum) and bolometric luminosity
(i.e., more luminous quasars are less volatile).
The luminosity trend may reflect the fact that more luminous quasars host larger
accretion disks, so that shortвҖ‘timescale fluctuations are averaged over a larger
emitting area.
Due to the way
О·
\eta
appears in the stochastic differential equation
form of the definition of the CAR(1) process, the expected dependence
on redshift, assuming time dilation only, is
ОІ
3
=
вҲ’
0.5
\beta_{3}=-0.5
. Any deviation
from this value implies evolution in the intrinsic properties of quasars.
Our inferred value is
ОІ
3
=
вҲ’
0.677
Вұ
0.055
\beta_{3}=-0.677\pm 0.055
, which is slightly lower than
вҲ’
0.5
-0.5
.
This suggests that intrinsic volatility decreases with redshift,
implying that quasars have tended to become more volatile (higher
О·
\eta
)
over cosmic time. Due to Equation
6
, there is a factor of
вҲ’
2
-2
to convert from our parameter
ОІ
3
\beta_{3}
to the
П„
\tau
scaling parameter
(which
Lewis and Brewer (
2023
)
and
Brewer
et al.
(
2025
)
called
n
n
). This factor makes a quasar with intrinsic timescale
П„
\tau
appear to us as a timescale
П„
вҖӢ
(
1
+
z
)
n
\tau(1+z)^{n}
. When expressed in terms of
n
n
, the result is
n
=
1.35
Вұ
0.11
n=1.35\pm 0.11
, somewhat higher than the value in the aforementioned papers, which found
n
=
1.28
вҲ’
0.29
+
0.28
n=1.28^{+0.28}_{-0.29}
and
n
=
1.14
Вұ
0.34
n=1.14\pm 0.34
respectively.
Our result thus indicates intrinsic evolution that was not seen in the S22
П„
\tau
estimates, but can be picked up from
О·
\eta
. Our uncertainty is also significantly
smaller, since
О·
\eta
is much more measurable for individual light curves than
П„
\tau
.
The
Пү
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\omega_{\rm\log_{10}(\eta)}
hyperparameter is an intrinsic scatter
term, describing how much the
log-volatility values tend to depart from the values predicted by the
regression surface. Its value is estimated to be
0.1006
Вұ
0.0031
0.1006\pm 0.0031
.
This may be compared with
the actual scatter of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
across all light curves, which
is a derived parameter from the model (it is numerically the standard
deviation of all of the
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
parameters and can be computed
once for each posterior sample). The squared ratio of these quantities
indicates that the proportion of the variance of
log
10
вҒЎ
(
О·
)
\log_{10}(\eta)
that is explained
by
О»
\lambda
and
L
bol
L_{\rm bol}
is about 67%.
The inferred jitter hyperparameters are
m
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
)
=
вҲ’
2.653
Вұ
0.057
m_{\log_{10}({\rm jitter})}=-2.653\pm 0.057
and
Пү
log
10
вҒЎ
(
jitter
)
=
0.721
Вұ
0.049
\omega_{\log_{10}({\rm jitter})}=0.721\pm 0.049
, indicating that jitter is a small
but consistent contributor to the noise in light curve measurements.
Finally, for completeness,
the estimated marginal likelihood for this model is
log
вҒЎ
(
Z
)
=
238145.4
\log(Z)=238145.4
,
and the prior-to-posterior Kullback-Leibler divergence is about
1700
1700
nats.
In future studies, alternative models can be compared with this one
without having to redo all of the computation for this model.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we investigated the information theoretic properties of the problem
of inferring stochastic time series parameters from light curve data,
with a focus on the simplest damped random walk commonly used for
quasar variability studies.
The primary issue is the difficulty of inferring the characteristic
timescale
П„
\tau
without making an artificial assumption that the mean
parameter
Ој
\mu
is known. The variations that we see in typical light
curves can often be explained with extremely large timescales, and potentially
with the mean parameter
Ој
\mu
being very different from the magnitudes
actually observed in the data.
With
Ој
\mu
as a free parameter,
the remaining uncertainty about
log
10
вҒЎ
(
П„
)
\log_{10}(\tau)
in the posterior distribution, based on a light curve with
N
=
250
N=250
measurements
over about 20 years, is about
Вұ
0.6
\pm\penalty 10000\ 0.6
dex with informative priors
and about
Вұ
2
\pm\penalty 10000\ 2
dex with flat priors, which is substantial.
Use of structure functions or other descriptive statistics (such
as a periodogram used as a general power spectral density estimator) does not
resolve the issue about
Ој
\mu
, because they implicitly assume that
Ој
\mu
is known
(or, in the case of periodograms, can be marginalised out
assuming a sinusoidal signal; Bretthorst,
1988
)
, and therefore inherit the same limitations.
However,
we identified the parameter that is actually well measured by light curve
data вҖ” the short term volatility
О·
\eta
. This parameter is informed by
changes in magnitude observed over short periods (e.g., over days), and
it is straightforward to accumulate such measurements over realistic
observing periods.
Based on this finding, we created a hierarchical regression model to infer
the parameters of the
Stone
et al.
(
2022
)
sample of quasar light curves. The regression model
predicts volatility as a function of rest wavelength, bolometric luminosity,
and redshift. The volatility shows a decreasing trend with respect to
all of these variables. Thus, quasars are more volatile at short wavelengths,
lower bolometric luminosities, and at lower redshift. The redshift dependence
is steeper than cosmological time dilation would predict on its own, indicating
that quasars have evolved to become less volatile over cosmic time.
While our hierarchical model also allows for improved inference of
П„
\tau
by pooling information across light curves, these inferences should be interpreted
with caution as it is likely that the CAR(1) model is misspecified, i.e., it
makes unrealistic predictions over very long timescales. Thus, the вҖҳmeasuredвҖҷ
П„
\tau
values from the hierarchical model, while much more constrained than those from single light curves, may not be physically meaningful.
While there are significant difficulties involved in inference for the CAR(1)
model, some fields which use these models will not be affected by these
difficulties.
For instance, reverberation mapping
(e.g. Zu
et al.
,
2011
; Pancoast
et al.
,
2011
)
and gravitational lens time delays
(Hojjati and Linder,
2014
)
,
which use stochastic variability
models primarily to interpolate and extrapolate light curves over
short time periods,
should not be significantly
affected by the arguments presented in this paper.
These methods are mostly sensitive to the
uncertainty in the details of
y
вҖӢ
(
t
)
y(t)
, rather than the stochastic
model parameters (which are hyperparameters in this context).
We conclude that issues identified in this paper should contribute to
clearer, more statistically robust quasar variability studies in the future.
Acknowledgments
It is a pleasure to thank Tommaso Treu (UCLA) for a helpful conversation about
this topic.
Will Farr (Stony Brook, Flatiron) and
David Hogg (NYU, Flatiron) also provided input about an approximation scheme
for hierarchical models that we used in some preliminary analyses, and in Ryan YuвҖҷs honours dissertation, but
did not make it into the final paper.
Software & Data Availability
The software implementing the analyses presented in this paper is
available online under the MIT licence at
https://github.com/eggplantbren/NewCAR
.
All model fitting is performed using Diffusive Nested Sampling
(Brewer
et al.
,
2011
; Brewer and Foreman-Mackey,
2018
)
, a variant of Nested Sampling
(Skilling,
2006
)
that
uses Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) exclusively.
To compute information theoretic quantities
such as posterior entropies and mutual informations presented
in Section
4
, we used a modified version
of the algorithm by
Brewer (
2017
)
, which is implemented
at
https://github.com/eggplantbren/PostEnt2026
.
References
S. Aigrain and D. Foreman-Mackey (2023)
Gaussian process regression for astronomical time series
.
Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics
61
(
1
),
pp.В 329вҖ“371
.
Cited by:
В§2.2
.
G. L. Bretthorst (1988)
Excerpts from bayesian spectrum analysis and parameter estimation
.
In
Maximum-Entropy and Bayesian Methods in Science and Engineering: Foundations
,
pp.В 75вҖ“145
.
Cited by:
В§7
.
B. Brewer and D. Foreman-Mackey (2018)
DNest4: diffusive nested sampling in C++ and Python
.
Journal of Statistical Software, Articles
86
(
7
),
pp.В 1вҖ“33
.
External Links:
ISSN 1548-7660
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§2.1
,
Software & Data Availability
.
B. J. Brewer and T. M. Elliott (2014)
Hierarchical reverberation mapping
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters
439
(
1
),
pp.В L31вҖ“L35
.
Cited by:
В§6.4
.
B. J. Brewer, G. F. Lewis, and Y. Li (2025)
Revisiting the cosmological time dilation of distant quasars: influence of source properties and evolution
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
537
(
2
),
pp.В 809вҖ“816
.
Cited by:
В§1
,
В§6.4
,
В§6
.
B. J. Brewer, L. B. PГЎrtay, and G. CsГЎnyi (2011)
Diffusive nested sampling
.
Statistics and Computing
21
(
4
),
pp.В 649вҖ“656
.
Cited by:
В§2.1
,
Software & Data Availability
.
B. J. Brewer (2017)
Computing entropies with nested sampling
.
Entropy
19
(
8
),
pp.В 422
.
Cited by:
В§4
,
Software & Data Availability
.
C. J. Burke, Y. Shen, O. Blaes, C. F. Gammie, K. Horne, Y. Jiang, X. Liu, I. M. McHardy, C. W. Morgan, S. Scaringi,
et al.
(2021)
A characteristic optical variability time scale in astrophysical accretion disks
.
Science
373
(
6556
),
pp.В 789вҖ“792
.
Cited by:
В§6
.
A. Caticha and A. Giffin (2006)
Updating probabilities
.
arXiv preprint physics/0608185
.
Cited by:
footnote 2
.
A. Caticha (2021)
Entropy, information, and the updating of probabilities
.
Entropy
23
(
7
),
pp.В 895
.
Cited by:
footnote 2
.
B. Czerny, S. Cao, V. K. Jaiswal, V. Karas, N. Khadka, M. L. MartГӯnez-Aldama, M. H. Naddaf, S. Panda, F. Pozo NuГұez, R. Prince, B. Ratra, M. Sniegowska, Z. Yu, and M. ZajaДҚek (2023)
Accretion disks, quasars and cosmology: meandering towards understanding
.
Astrophysics and Space Science
368
(
2
).
External Links:
ISSN 1572-946X
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
В§1
.
J. Fagin, J. H. Chan, H. Best, M. OвҖҷDowd, K. E. S. Ford, M. J. Graham, J. W. Park, and V. A. Villar (2025)
Joint modeling of quasar variability and accretion disk reprocessing using latent stochastic differential equations
.
The Astrophysical Journal
988
(
1
),
pp.В 59
.
External Links:
ISSN 1538-4357
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
В§1
.
D. Foreman-Mackey (2018)
Scalable Backpropagation for Gaussian Processes using Celerite
.
Research Notes of the American Astronomical Society
2
(
1
),
pp.В 31
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
В§2.2
.
T. Gneiting and A. E. Raftery (2007)
Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation
.
Journal of the American statistical Association
102
(
477
),
pp.В 359вҖ“378
.
Cited by:
В§5
.
D. W. Hogg, A. D. Myers, and J. Bovy (2010)
Inferring the eccentricity distribution
.
The Astrophysical Journal
725
(
2
),
pp.В 2166
.
Cited by:
В§6.4
.
D. W. Hogg (2018)
A likelihood function for the Gaia Data
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp.В arXiv:1804.07766
.
External Links:
Document
,
1804.07766
Cited by:
В§6
.
A. Hojjati and E. V. Linder (2014)
Next generation strong lensing time delay estimation with gaussian processes
.
Physical Review D
90
(
12
),
pp.В 123501
.
Cited by:
В§7
.
I. N. Huda, J. Souchay, C. Barache, J. -. Liu, and N. Liu (2025)
Statistical analysis of quasars in lqac-6: astrometry, brightness, and redshift
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
542
(
3
),
pp.В 2389вҖ“2403
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/542/3/2389/64114409/staf1398.pdf
Cited by:
В§2.3
.
B. C. Kelly, J. Bechtold, and A. Siemiginowska (2009)
Are the variations in quasar optical flux driven by thermal fluctuations?
.
The Astrophysical Journal
698
(
1
),
pp.В 895
.
Cited by:
В§1
,
В§2.2
,
В§2.2
,
В§6
.
B. C. Kelly, A. C. Becker, M. Sobolewska, A. Siemiginowska, and P. Uttley (2014)
Flexible and scalable methods for quantifying stochastic variability in the era of massive time-domain astronomical data sets
.
The Astrophysical Journal
788
(
1
),
pp.В 33
.
Cited by:
В§1
.
K. H. Knuth (2005a)
Lattice duality: the origin of probability and entropy
.
Neurocomputing
67
,
pp.В 245вҖ“274
.
Note:
Geometrical Methods in Neural Networks and Learning
External Links:
ISSN 0925-2312
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
В§4
.
K. Knuth (2005b)
Toward question-asking machines: the logic of questions and the inquiry calculus
.
In
International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics
,
pp.В 174вҖ“180
.
Cited by:
В§4
.
S. KozЕӮowski (2017)
Limitations on the recovery of the true agn variability parameters using damped random walk modeling
.
Astronomy & Astrophysics
597
,
pp.В A128
.
Cited by:
В§1
,
Figure 6
,
В§4
.
G. F. Lewis and B. J. Brewer (2023)
Detection of the cosmological time dilation of high-redshift quasars
.
Nature Astronomy
7
(
10
),
pp.В 1265вҖ“1269
.
Cited by:
В§1
,
В§6.4
,
В§6
.
P. Padovani, D. M. Alexander, R. J. Assef, B. De Marco, P. Giommi, R. C. Hickox, G. T. Richards, V. SmolДҚiДҮ, E. Hatziminaoglou, V. Mainieri, and M. Salvato (2017)
Active galactic nuclei: whatвҖҷs in a name?
.
The Astronomy and Astrophysics Review
25
(
1
).
External Links:
ISSN 1432-0754
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
В§1
.
A. Pancoast, B. J. Brewer, and T. Treu (2011)
Geometric and dynamical models of reverberation mapping data
.
The Astrophysical Journal
730
(
2
),
pp.В 139
.
Cited by:
В§7
.
R. K. Pearson, Y. Neuvo, J. Astola, and M. Gabbouj (2015)
The class of generalized hampel filters
.
In
2015 23rd European signal processing conference (EUSIPCO)
,
pp.В 2501вҖ“2505
.
Cited by:
В§6.1
.
C. E. Shannon (1948)
A mathematical theory of communication
.
The Bell system technical journal
27
(
3
),
pp.В 379вҖ“423
.
Cited by:
В§4
.
S. Sharma (2017)
Markov chain monte carlo methods for bayesian data analysis in astronomy
.
Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics
55
,
pp.В 213вҖ“259
.
Cited by:
В§2.1
.
J. Skilling (2006)
Nested sampling for general bayesian computation
.
Bayesian analysis
1
(
4
),
pp.В 833вҖ“859
.
Cited by:
В§2.1
,
В§4
,
Software & Data Availability
.
Z. Stone, Y. Shen, C. J. Burke, Y. Chen, Q. Yang, X. Liu, R. A. Gruendl, M. AdamГіw, F. Andrade-Oliveira, J. Annis, D. Bacon, E. Bertin, S. Bocquet, D. Brooks, D. L. Burke, A. Carnero Rosell, M. Carrasco Kind, J. Carretero, L. N. da Costa, M. E. S. Pereira, J. De Vicente, S. Desai, H. T. Diehl, P. Doel, I. Ferrero, D. N. Friedel, J. Frieman, J. GarcГӯa-Bellido, E. Gaztanaga, D. Gruen, G. Gutierrez, S. R. Hinton, D. L. Hollowood, K. Honscheid, D. J. James, K. Kuehn, N. Kuropatkin, C. Lidman, M. A. G. Maia, F. Menanteau, R. Miquel, R. Morgan, F. Paz-ChinchГіn, A. Pieres, A. A. Plazas MalagГіn, M. Rodriguez-Monroy, E. Sanchez, V. Scarpine, S. Serrano, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, M. Smith, E. Suchyta, M. E. C. Swanson, G. TarlГ©, C. To, and DES Collaboration (2022)
Optical variability of quasars with 20-yr photometric light curves
.
MNRAS
514
(
1
),
pp.В 164вҖ“184
.
External Links:
Document
,
2201.02762
Cited by:
В§1
,
В§7
.
K. L. Suberlak, ЕҪ. IveziДҮ, and C. MacLeod (2021)
Improving damped random walk parameters for sdss stripe 82 quasars with pan-starrs1
.
The Astrophysical Journal
907
(
2
),
pp.В 96
.
Cited by:
В§6
.
C. K. Williams and C. E. Rasmussen (2006)
Gaussian processes for machine learning
.
Vol.
2
,
MIT press Cambridge, MA
.
Cited by:
В§2.2
.
Y. Zu, C. S. Kochanek, and B. M. Peterson (2011)
An Alternative Approach to Measuring Reverberation Lags in Active Galactic Nuclei
.
ApJ
735
(
2
),
pp.В 80
.
External Links:
Document
,
1008.0641
Cited by:
В§7
.
Y. Zu, C. Kochanek, S. KozЕӮowski, and A. Udalski (2013)
Is quasar optical variability a damped random walk?
.
The Astrophysical Journal
765
(
2
),
pp.В 106
.
Cited by:
В§1
.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA