An optimized tidal-trigger model of the QBO, and some implications for the Carrington event
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
1
Introduction
2
Used data and employed methods
3
Optimization
4
Carrington event
5
Predictions for the remainder of cycle 25
6
Summary and Conclusions
References
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2606.07132v1 [astro-ph.SR] 05 Jun 2026
An optimized tidal-trigger model of the QBO, and some implications for the Carrington event
F. Stefani
G.M. Horstmann
G. Mamatsashvili
T. Weier
Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden – Rossendorf, Bautzner Landstr. 400,
D-01328 Dresden, Germany
keywords:
Solar cycle, Models Helicity, Theory
\setlastpage
\inarticletrue
{opening}
1
Introduction
While the key role of Rossby waves in weather on Earth
has been known for almost a century
(Rossby,
1939
)
,
similar waves may also be important for solar activity
and space weather
(Zaqarashvili,
2010a
,
b
; Dikpati,
2012
; Marquez-Artavia, Jones, and Tobias,
2017
; Dikpati et al.,
2018
; Gachechiladze et al.,
2019
; Bilenko,
2020
; Dikpati et al.,
2020
; Zaqarashvili et al.,
2021
)
.
This applies, in particular, to the quasi-biennial oscillation (QBO)
(Bazilevskaya et al.,
2014
)
, which has attracted considerable interest
since its discovery in coronal holes by
McIntosh, Thompson, and Willock (
1992
)
, and in
cosmic rays and open magnetic flux by
Valdeéz-Galicia, Pérez-Enríquz, and Otaola (
1996
)
and
Rouillard and Lockwood (
2004
)
.
As shown by
Zaqarashvili (
2010a
)
,
the interplay between differential rotation and the
strong toroidal magnetic field at the tachocline results in the instability of magneto-Rossby waves therein with a period of
approximately two years.
Moreover,
Raphaldini et al. (
2019
)
argued that the dynamics of a
resonant triad of magneto-Rossby waves could lead to periodically
changing wave amplitudes with periods comparable to the
dominant 11-year Schwabe cycle.
In this respect, a most interesting feature of magneto-Rossby waves is that their
typical eigenperiods of a few hundred days
fit remarkably well with the spring-tide periods of the tidally
dominant planets Venus, Earth and Jupiter.
A detailed mathematical study of the resonance conditions led
Horstmann et al. (
2023
)
to conclude that realistic-amplitude spring tides may trigger magneto-Rossby waves with velocities of the order of m s
-1
or larger, depending on a damping parameter whose precise value is still unknown. The three two-planet spring tides of Venus–Jupiter (with a period of 118 days), Earth–Jupiter (199 days) and Venus–Earth (292 days) were shown by
Stefani et al. (
2024
)
to have a beat period of 11.07 years, which corresponds remarkably well to the Schwabe cycle.
This link between magneto-Rossby waves and the Schwabe cycle may provide the
long-sought physical argument for the
synchronization of the solar dynamo by the weak planetary tidal forces
as suggested and discussed in a number of previous papers
(Hung,
2007
; Abreu et al.,
2012
; Scafetta,
2012
; Wilson,
2013
; Okhlopkov,
2016
; Stefani et al.,
2016
; Stefani, Giesecke, and Weier,
2019
; Stefani, Stepanov, and Weier,
2021
; Charbonneau,
2022
; Klevs, Stefani, and Jouve,
2023
)
.
Another, much shorter beat of the three waves, with a period of 1.723 years, was
revealed by
Stefani et al. (
2025
)
.
Motivated by the remarkable finding of
Velasco Herrera et al. (
2018
)
that ground-level enhancement (GLE) events exhibit
phase stability over nearly six solar cycles, we found a very precise
agreement
between the observed period and the theoretical one.
More recently
(Stefani et al.,
2026
)
, we applied similar statistical
methods to 37 S-flares,
and their merger with 72 GLE events, which all showed
phase stability and very similar periods.
Encouraged by this result, we tested also
various functions containing the sum of the three cosines
with the periods of the spring-tides, and their time-averages.
Again we found significant correlations of
around 0.4. In an initial attempt to test various weights of
the three functions, this value increased to around 0.45.
In the present paper, we aim at optimizing this correlation by
taking the magnetic-field dependence of the excitation efficiency
of the
three magneto-Rossby waves into serious consideration.
To achieve this, we use the averaged monthly sunspot number as a proxy for the toroidal field at the tachocline.
As will be demonstrated, optimized parametrizations of the weights of the three waves provide correlations of
up to 0.8, which is statistically highly significant.
In this context, we will observe that a number of extreme solar events,
which occur far from the maxima of the respective solar cycle, correspond
nicely to the peaks of the optimized tidal-trigger function.
We will then take a look at the famous Carrington event
of September 1
st
1859 and ask how it may be related to the previously
optimized tidal-trigger function and the evolution of the
sunspot number during solar cycle 10.
As we will see, the behaviour before and around
the Carrington event is remarkably similar to that of cycle 22,
which exhibited a massive clustering of extreme solar events
in the summer and autumn of 1989.
We will also make a cautious attempt to forecast on
solar activity for the remainder of cycle 25.
The paper will conclude with a summary of the results and an
outlook on future work.
2
Used data and employed methods
In this section, we will describe the data utilized in this paper and discuss the methods employed to analyze them.
Figure 1.
:
The 109 extreme solar events, including 72 GLE events and 37
S-flare events, shown alongside different
functions. (a) Including the 13-months-averaged monthly sunspot number
SSN
\rm SSN
for the entire time interval between 1956 and 2025.
(b) Including the function
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
and two representative
time averages of it.
To improve visibility, we have selected only the time segment
between days 8,000 and 16,000 after 1955/12/31. (c)
Including the axisymmetric part
of
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
, together with same time-averages as in (b).
\ilabel
fig:3
We start with the 13-month average of the monthly sunspot number
as obtained from www.sidc.be/SILSO/infosnmstot .
This smoothed dataset, shown as the yellow curve in Figure 1a, is considered
most appropriate for our purposes, since it appears to be a good proxy
for the field at the tachocline during (or shortly before)
the extreme solar events to be considered.
As for the latter, Figure 1a shows the total of 109 extreme solar events
in the time interval between from 1956 to 2025. These
include, first, the 72 GLE-events (green),
obtained from gle.oulu.fi, and, second, the 37 events of solar
superflares of S-class (
>
>
X10 in soft X-rays)
taken from
Tan et al. (
2025
)
and
Velasco Herrera et al. (
2026
)
.
For the precise dates of these events,
please refer to Table 1 (GLE) and Table 2 (S-flare)
of
Stefani et al. (
2026
)
.
Note that that we do not try to provide additional details
about the strength of these events. Instead, they are all
given the same weight of 1.
Next, we will examine the tidally-triggered magneto-Rossby waves
in the tachocline.
The function
s
​
(
t
)
\displaystyle s(t)
=
\displaystyle=
A
​
cos
⁡
(
4
​
π
​
t
−
t
VJ
P
VJ
)
+
B
​
cos
⁡
(
4
​
π
​
t
−
t
EJ
P
EJ
)
+
C
​
cos
⁡
(
4
​
π
​
t
−
t
VE
P
VE
)
,
\displaystyle A\cos\left(4\pi\frac{t-t_{\rm VJ}}{P_{\rm VJ}}\right)+B\cos\left(4\pi\frac{t-t_{\rm EJ}}{P_{\rm EJ}}\right)+C\cos\left(4\pi\frac{t-t_{\rm VE}}{P_{\rm VE}}\right)\;,
(1)
whose square
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
is shown in Figure 1b, is the sum of three cosines that
represent the Rossby waves as excited by the planetary tides.
Their periods correspond to the two-planet spring-tides of Venus-Jupiter, Earth-Jupiter and Venus-Earth.
The specific values used here are the
synodic periods
P
VJ
=
0.64884
P_{\rm VJ}=0.64884
years,
P
EJ
=
1.09207
P_{\rm EJ}=1.09207
years,
P
VE
=
1.59876
P_{\rm VE}=1.59876
years, and the
epochs of the corresponding conjunctions
t
VJ
=
2002.34
t_{\rm VJ}=2002.34
,
t
EJ
=
2003.09
t_{\rm EJ}=2003.09
, and
t
VE
=
2002.83
t_{\rm VE}=2002.83
, all taken
from
Scafetta (
2022
)
.
While the three weights
A
A
,
B
B
and
C
C
will play a key role in the following sections, for generating the plots in Figure 1 they were all set to
unity. In addition to the function
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
, we also show
two representative time averages with
moving-average windows of 101 and 301 days.
The full-line curves shown in Figure 1b refer to
zero azimuthal angle, while the dashed curves in Figure 1c show the
corresponding averages over the azimuth, i.e. the axisymmetric
part of
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
. Note that
it is by no means a given that the curves in
Figure 1b and 1c are so similar.
Actually, this similarity has to do with the notion of
“orbital invariance”,
defined by
Scafetta (
2022
)
.
Even a mere visual inspection reveals a certain
degree of synchronizm between the solar events and
the averaged sunspot number on one hand
(Figure 1a), and the peaks of the function
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
(and its time and/or azimuthal averages) on the other hand
(Figures 1b,c).
To quantify this connection, we compute
the correlation
Corr
\displaystyle{\rm Corr}
=
\displaystyle=
∑
i
=
1
N
[
f
​
(
t
i
)
−
f
​
(
t
)
¯
]
∑
i
=
1
N
[
f
​
(
t
i
)
−
f
​
(
t
)
¯
]
2
,
\displaystyle\frac{\sum_{i=1}^{N}[f(t_{i})-\overline{f(t)}]}{\sqrt{\sum_{i=1}^{N}[f(t_{i})-\overline{f(t)}]^{2}}}\;,
(2)
between
the
N
=
109
N=109
extreme solar events with a
given function
f
​
(
t
)
f(t)
, as introduced in
Stefani et al. (
2026
)
.
If we use for
f
​
(
t
)
f(t)
the averaged monthly sunspot number,
SSN
​
(
t
)
\rm SSN(t)
, we obtain a correlation of 0.56. Such a high value is not surprising, given that extreme solar events often, although not always, occur around the maximum of the solar cycle.
What is more remarkable is the fact that the tidal-trigger function
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
also exhibits statistically significant correlations with solar events.
In Table 1 we provide
the corresponding values of
Corr
\rm Corr
for different time and/or azimuthal averages.
Table 1.
:
Correlations
Corr
\rm Corr
of
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
, its axisymmetric part, and various time
averages with the 109 extreme solar events for the simple
equal-weight parameter choice
A
=
B
=
C
=
1
A=B=C=1
. The maximum correlation
values in the third column occur at the optimal time-shift between
the function and the solar events that is indicated in the second column.
Here, a positive value means that the highest correlation
occurs for
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
taken at later times than the
very solar events.
Average (days)
Optimum shift (days)
Corr
\rm Corr
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
1
80
0.335
61
74
0.339
101
51
0.307
201
12
0.396
301
65
0.380
401
21
0.463
Axisymmetric
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
1
94
0.276
61
92
0.286
101
89
0.302
201
33
0.370
301
15
0.414
401
15
0.430
The discussion up to this point corresponds basically to the
state of affairs as described in
Stefani et al. (
2026
)
.
The obtained correlations of around 0.4 are already highly
significant, with a
p
p
-value around
10
−
5
10^{-5}
for the considered
109 events.
The question now is whether this correlation can
be further enhanced with an improved
physical modeling.
To do this, we will take a closer look at the weights
A
A
,
B
B
and
C
C
in Equation 1. On the one hand, they are proportional to the respective spring-tide triggers of the planets. Of these, the Venus-Jupiter combination (118 days) is stronger than the other two.
On the other hand, as shown in Figures 2, 3 and 4 of
Stefani et al. (
2024
)
,
the amplitude of tidally-triggered Rossby waves depends
also, and in a
non-trivial manner, on the toroidal field
B
φ
B_{\varphi}
prevailing
at the tachocline. Roughly speaking, the wave amplitude is quite small for vanishing fields and generally increases as the field increases.
However, as exemplified in Figure 4 of
Stefani et al. (
2024
)
for the wave
with
P
V
​
E
=
292
P_{VE}=292
days, it can also happen
that the tidal excitation completely is completely suppressed
in the case of a
field that is too strong, exceeding (for the specific parameters of
Figure 4) some 40 kG (i.e., 4 T).
The first step in the physical modeling of the toroidal field effect
is to infer its value
B
φ
B_{\varphi}
at the tachocline level from the
averaged sunspot number. We use here the
relation
B
φ
=
5.0
​
SSN
/
141.7
​
T
,
\displaystyle B_{\varphi}=5.0\sqrt{{\rm SSN}/141.7}\;{\rm T}\;,
(3)
which is motivated by applying a typical dynamo-scaling relation to
the average sunspot number 141.7 measured in 1956, and assuming
a field at the tachocline of 5 T for that time.
Note, however, that the precise numerical factor is
unimportant as it will be absorbed in an overall scaling
factor when carrying out the optimization process.
In a second step, we parametrize the field dependence of the weights in Equation (1) in the
form
A
​
(
B
φ
)
\displaystyle A(B_{\varphi})
=
\displaystyle=
(
a
0
+
a
2
​
B
φ
2
​
(
1
−
B
φ
2
/
a
4
2
)
)
\displaystyle(a_{0}+a_{2}B^{2}_{\varphi}(1-B^{2}_{\varphi}/a^{2}_{4}))
(4)
×
0.5
​
(
1
+
sgn
​
(
a
0
+
a
2
​
B
φ
2
​
(
1
−
B
φ
2
/
a
4
2
)
)
)
,
\displaystyle\times 0.5(1+\rm{sgn}(a_{0}+a_{2}B^{2}_{\varphi}(1-B^{2}_{\varphi}/a^{2}_{4})))\;,
and correspondingly for
B
​
(
B
φ
)
B(B_{\varphi})
and
C
​
(
B
φ
)
C(B_{\varphi})
.
The parameters in Equation 4 can be interpreted as follows:
The value of
a
0
a_{0}
(and, by extension,
b
0
b_{0}
and
c
0
c_{0}
) is a measure
for the excitation efficiency of the Rossby waves in the absence of
any prevailing magnetic field
B
φ
B_{\varphi}
.
The value of
a
2
a_{2}
(as well as
b
2
b_{2}
and
c
2
c_{2}
) indicates the
general sensitivity of wave excitation on the magnetic field
strength. Finally,
a
4
a_{4}
(as well as
b
4
b_{4}
and
c
4
c_{4}
) has the dimension
of a magnetic field and determines the field strength at which the wave excitation breaks down. Therefore, it should be in the range of
a few Tesla. Note that the second line of Equation (4) serves
just to avoid negative values.
Aiming at maximizing correlations, the ansatz of Equation 4
leaves us with nine parameters, one of which could be set to unity
since
Corr
\rm Corr
does not depend on an overall scaling factor of
s
2
s^{2}
.
Nevertheless, even the remaining eight-dimensional optimization problem
is numerically quite expensive. In the following section, we will
therefore test some restricted versions of it.
3
Optimization
In this section, we will optimize the correlation according to Equation 2
when
f
f
is identified with
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
, or
its azimuthal and/or time-averages.
The optimization itself is carried out using a simple
look-up table.
This means that the correlation is computed for each considered parameter set
a
i
a_{i}
,
b
i
b_{i}
and
c
i
c_{i}
, and the set yielding the
highest value of
Corr
\rm Corr
is selected as optimum. In an intermediate step,
we determine at
which time-shift between the tidal-trigger function and
the solar events
Corr
\rm Corr
is maximum.
Table 2 and Figure 2 illustrate a simple initial example, for which
we set
a
0
=
b
0
=
c
0
=
0
a_{0}=b_{0}=c_{0}=0
and
c
2
=
1
c_{2}=1
beforehand, and then vary the remaining five
parameters, resulting in the optimized set:
a
2
=
0.7
a_{2}=0.7
,
b
2
=
0.7
b_{2}=0.7
,
a
4
=
7.6
a_{4}=7.6
,
b
4
=
4.0
b_{4}=4.0
, and
c
4
=
4.8
c_{4}=4.8
.
Remarkably, for the longer moving average windows
the obtained correlation reaches values of up to 0.75,
which is already higher than the correlation with sunspot
numbers alone (0.56). Figure 2 shows that, as
SSN
\rm SSN
approaches zero, the tidal-trigger function
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
drops also
to zero. Obviously, this is because of the choice
a
0
=
b
0
=
c
0
=
0
a_{0}=b_{0}=c_{0}=0
. By contrast, on the high-field end,
we observe a certain flattening due to the combined
effect of the suppressed excitation and the time average.
Figure 2.
:
The 109 extreme solar events jointly with different
averages of
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
for the parameter choice:
a
0
=
b
0
=
c
0
=
0
a_{0}=b_{0}=c_{0}=0
,
a
2
=
0.7
a_{2}=0.7
,
b
2
=
0.7
b_{2}=0.7
,
c
2
=
1
c_{2}=1
,
a
4
=
7.6
a_{4}=7.6
,
b
4
=
4.0
b_{4}=4.0
,
c
4
=
4.8
c_{4}=4.8
.
(a) With three representative time-averages of
s
2
s^{2}
. (b)
With three representative time-averages of the
axisymmetric part of
s
2
s^{2}
.
\ilabel
fig:3
Table 2.
:
Same as Table 1, but for the first optimized parameter
set with
a
0
=
b
0
=
c
0
=
0
a_{0}=b_{0}=c_{0}=0
,
a
2
=
0.7
a_{2}=0.7
,
b
2
=
0.7
b_{2}=0.7
,
c
2
=
1
c_{2}=1
,
a
4
=
7.6
a_{4}=7.6
,
b
4
=
4.0
b_{4}=4.0
,
c
4
=
4.8
c_{4}=4.8
.
Average (days)
Optimum shift (days)
Corr
\rm Corr
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
1
95
0.447
61
118
0.587
101
122
0.633
201
20
0.737
301
-24
0.751
401
-9
0.744
Axisymmetric
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
1
132
0.585
61
124
0.611
101
122
0.652
201
33
0.724
301
4
0.745
401
-15
0.750
Figure 3 and Table 3 illustrate another example
in which we have set beforehand
a
2
=
b
2
=
c
2
=
1
a_{2}=b_{2}=c_{2}=1
and optimized then the remaining parameters, resulting in:
a
0
=
0
a_{0}=0
,
b
0
=
3.0
b_{0}=3.0
,
c
0
=
5.0
c_{0}=5.0
,
a
4
=
7.9
a_{4}=7.9
,
b
4
=
3.5
b_{4}=3.5
,
c
4
=
4.5
c_{4}=4.5
.
Here, only
a
0
a_{0}
has turned out to be zero, while
b
0
b_{0}
and
c
0
c_{0}
acquire some finite values.
This is quite plausible
in view of the different low-field limits
of the three waves as
shown in
Figures 2, 3, and 4 of
Stefani et al. (
2024
)
.
The correlations now reach values close to 0.8, which is
indeed a remarkably high value.
The improvement is part due to the
fact that
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
can now take on reasonably large values
even when
SSN
\rm SSN
is comparably small.
Figure 3.
:
Same as Figure 2, but for the parameter choice:
a
0
=
0
a_{0}=0
,
b
0
=
3.0
b_{0}=3.0
,
c
0
=
5.0
c_{0}=5.0
,
a
2
=
b
2
=
c
2
=
1
a_{2}=b_{2}=c_{2}=1
,
a
4
=
7.9
a_{4}=7.9
,
b
4
=
3.5
b_{4}=3.5
,
c
4
=
4.5
c_{4}=4.5
.
\ilabel
fig:3
Table 3.
:
Same as Table 2, but for the parameter choice:
a
0
=
0
a_{0}=0
,
b
0
=
3.0
b_{0}=3.0
,
c
0
=
5.0
c_{0}=5.0
,
a
2
=
b
2
=
c
2
=
1
a_{2}=b_{2}=c_{2}=1
,
a
4
=
7.9
a_{4}=7.9
,
b
4
=
3.5
b_{4}=3.5
,
c
4
=
4.5
c_{4}=4.5
.
Average (days)
Optimum shift (days)
Correlation
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
1
96
0.402
61
115
0.523
101
126
0.570
201
22
0.782
301
-22
0.783
401
-1
0.785
Axisymmetric
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
1
136
0.512
61
130
0.537
101
129
0.582
201
27
0.746
301
7
0.776
401
-19
0.798
To better understand this effect, Figure 4 focuses
on those peaks of the time-averaged
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
-function close to
extreme solar events of cycles 21 and 23
where
SSN
\rm SSN
is quite small.
Some correspondences between those solar events
and the peaks of
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
are indicated by magenta arrows.
Figure 4.
:
Zoomed-in version of Figure 3, jointly with the sunspot number
SSN
\rm SSN
,
covering solar cycles 21 (a) and 23 (b).
The magenta arrows link peaks of the time-averaged
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
function
with extreme solar events at those times where
SSN
\rm SSN
is comparably small.
\ilabel
fig:3
4
Carrington event
Encouraged by the highly significant correlations
between the optimized tidal-trigger functions
and the
109 extreme solar events, this section
examines how the Carrington event
(Cliver et al.,
2022
)
of September 1
st
1859
would fit into this scheme.
This event, shown as the green open circle
in Figure 5a, corresponds to day 35,185 before
January 1
st
1956.
Again the yellow curve in this figure
shows the averaged monthly sunspot number
SSN
\rm SSN
, while
the light-blue curve show the 301-day averaged
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
.
Over a 600-day period before the Carrington event,
during which
SSN
\rm SSN
steadily increased,
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
remained
relatively constant.
One might get the impression that this constancy
enabled the Rossby waves to reach high amplitudes,
providing then the “final push‘” needed for the
flux tube to launch when
B
φ
B_{\varphi}
just reaches its maximum.
Remarkably, a similar pattern shows up when we compare this
behavior with that of cycle 22 (Figure 5b). Here, a large
cluster of extreme solar events occurred during the summer and
autumn of 1989, which seem to have a similar “prehistory” as
the Carrington event of 1859. This putative link is indicated
by the magenta dashed line.
Figure 5.
:
The Carrington event in the context of cycle 10, and
compared also with cycle 22. (a) Sunspot number and computed 301-day average of
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
for cycle 10,
with the Carrington event of 1859/09/01 indicated.
During the 600 days before the event,
SSN
\rm SSN
steadily
rose (symbolized by the yellow arrow) while
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
remained rather constant (light-blue arrow).
(b) The corresponding plot for cycle 22, with the clustering
of extreme solar events in
summer and autumn 1989 indicated. The dashed
magenta line shows the putative link.
\ilabel
fig:3
5
Predictions for the remainder of cycle 25
In this section, we ask what might be expected from our
results for the rest of solar cycle 25.
As with any forecast, this should be considered
with more than one grain of salt.
Evidently, the prediction of the tidal-trigger function
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
depends
strongly on the accuracy of the prediction of the toroidal
field
B
φ
B_{\varphi}
.
For the latter, we use again Equation 3 and
the prediction of the monthly sunspot number provided by
NOAA under
www.swpc.noaa.gov/products/predicted-sunspot-number-and-radio-flux.
The latter data are shown as
the dashed section of the yellow curve in Figure 6.
Based on this, we calculate
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
, the 301-day time
average of which is shown as the light-blue curve in
Figure 6.
Obviously, after the long plateau between days
24,600 and 25,300, a couple of peaks are predicted at
the indicated dates.
While the first one, December 5
th
2025, could indeed be
related to the GLE event of November 2025 and the
strong activity in January and February 2026, the
subsequent dates are, of course, highly uncertain.
Nevertheless, when the predicted curve is compared
with those of cycles 21 and 23 (see Figure 4), it
seems indeed possible that a few major events may still
occur in the remainder of cycle 25.
Figure 6.
:
Predictions for the remainder of cycle 25.
The yellow curve is divided into the measured
SSN
\rm SSN
(full line) and
the predicted one (dashed line) taken from
ww.swpc.noaa.gov/products/predicted-sunspot-number-and-radio-flux.
Obviously, the predicted
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
shows quite a couple of
candidate peaks in the remainder of cycle 25 at which
strong solar activity may be likely.
\ilabel
fig:3
6
Summary and Conclusions
In this paper, we have continued our efforts
to explain the QBO, and the related origin of
extreme solar events, by
tidally-triggered magneto-Rossby waves.
Once again, we set out from the
hypothesis that the two-planet spring-tides of
Venus-Jupiter, Earth-Jupiter, and Venus-Earth
trigger Rossby waves at the solar tachocline
with periods of 118, 199
and 292 days, respectively. While the resulting
beat of 629.29 days (1.723 years) was previously shown to be
the dominant period underlying extreme solar events,
the main focus laid now on the specific field
dependence of the three individual waves.
The parametrization ansatz chosen by us was inspired by the findings
of
Horstmann et al. (
2023
)
and
Stefani et al. (
2024
)
that the amplitudes of the waves typically
increase with the toroidal field, while their
resonant excitation can also break down in
the presence of too strong a field.
Our preliminary attempts to optimize the parameters
of this field dependence revealed correlations
with the extreme solar events of up
to 0.8, which is significantly higher than the
respective correlation based on
the sunspot number alone.
This suggests that the three tidally-triggered
magneto-Rossby waves are indeed the dominant
factor governing the occurrence of extreme solar
events, although the specific field dependence
of their respective weights
also plays a significant role.
It goes without saying that the parameterization and
optimization of the field dependencies can still be
improved. Our work is just the first step in this
direction.
A generic feature of this model is that large values of
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
may show up at relatively low values of the
averaged sunspot numbers, which could explain why extreme solar events can also occur at times far outside the maximum of solar cycles.
Encouraged by these results, we looked back to the
time of the Carrington event. Relying on the
deterministic influence of the planets, and the well-known
sunspot number during solar cycle 10, we computed the tidal-trigger function
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
for that time.
We found that, over a 600-day period before the Carrington event,
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
formed a relatively constant plateau while the sunspot number (and hence the toroidal field) increased steadily.
This suggests that the Rossby waves had sufficient time to
build up to strong amplitudes, while
B
φ
B_{\varphi}
was still
too weak to launch flux tubes.
Then, at the moment when
B
φ
B_{\varphi}
reached its maximum value,
the well-developed Rossby wave gave it the “final kick” needed to produce a strong rising flux tube.
Interestingly, the comparison with cycle 22 (Figure 5b) showed a remarkably similar pattern, with a significant cluster of extreme solar events occurring during the summer and autumn of 1989.
It seems worthwhile to investigate this
interaction between the slowly growing
B
φ
B_{\varphi}
and the steady accumulation of energy in the Rossby wave in more detail.
Ultimately, we ventured to predict the level of
solar activity for the remainder of cycle 25.
Based on a forecast of the steadily decaying sunspot
number, we identified a number of candidate peaks
of
s
2
​
(
t
)
s^{2}(t)
at which the solar activity
might be prone to further strong events.
Although such events would not be surprising given
similar occurrences during the decline phases of cycles
21 and 23, forecasts of this kind should certainly be treated
with great caution.
While the present work focused on explaining extreme solar events in terms of the
tidal-trigger function and its dependence
on the
observed
magnetic field, future work should aim to
compute this very field in a self-consistent manner.
Actually, all dynamo simulations
carried out previously
(Stefani, Giesecke, and Weier,
2019
; Stefani et al.,
2020
; Stefani, Stepanov, and Weier,
2021
; Klevs, Stefani, and Jouve,
2023
; Stefani et al.,
2024
,
2025
)
were mainly dedicated to the understanding
of the “planetary clock” of the Schwabe cycle, and
of longer time cycles such as Suess-de Vries and
Gleissberg.
In a sense, the current focus on explaining
the QBO and extreme solar events has taken us a
step back from this final goal. However, it has
not been forgotten.
Acknowledgments
F.S. would like to thank
Tony Phillips for inquiring into potential impacts
of the January 2026 alignment on solar activity, and
Lakshmi Pradeep Chitta for an inspiring discussion about
the “postdictability” of the Carrington event.
Funding information
This work received
funding from the Helmholtz Association
in frame of the AI project GEOMAGFOR (ZT-I-PF-5-200),
and from Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under Grant No. MA10950/1-1.
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.
References
Abreu et al. (2012)
Abreu, J.A.,
Beer, J.,
Ferriz-Mas, A.,
McCracken, K.G.,
Steinhilber, F.:
2012,
Is there a planetary influence on solar activity?
Astron. Astrophys.
548
,
A88.
DOI
.
Bazilevskaya et al. (2014)
Bazilevskaya, G.,
Broomhall, A.-M.,
Elsworth, Y.,
Nakariakov, V.M.:
2014,
A combined analysis of the observational aspects of the quasi-biennial oscillation in solar magnetic activity.
Space Sci. Rev.
186
,
358.
DOI
.
Bilenko (2020)
Bilenko, I.A.:
2020,
Manifestation of Rossby waves in the global magnetic field of the
Sun during cycles 21-24.
Astrophys. J.
897
,
L24.
DOI
.
Charbonneau (2022)
Charbonneau, P.:
2022,
External forcing of the solar dynamo.
Front. Astron. Space Sci.
9
,
853676.
DOI
.
Cliver et al. (2022)
Cliver, E.W.,
Schrijver, C.J.,
Shibata, K.,
Usoskin, I.G.:
2022,
Extreme solar events.
Liv. Rev. Sol. Phys.
19
,
2.
DOI
.
Dikpati (2012)
Dikpati, M.:
2012,
Nonlinear evolution of the globale hydrodynami shallow-water instability in the solar tachocline.
Astrophys. J.
745
,
128.
DOI
.
Dikpati et al. (2018)
Dikpati, M.,
McIntosh, S.W.,
Bothun, G.,
Cally, P.S.,
Ghosh, S.S.,
Gilman, P.A.,
Umurhan, O.M.:
2018,
Role of interaction between magnetic Rossby waves and tachocline
differential rotation in producing solar seasons.
Astrophys. J.
853
,
144.
DOI
.
Dikpati et al. (2020)
Dikpati, M.,
Gilman, P.A.,
Chatterjee, S.,
McIntosh, S.W.,
Zaqarashvili, T.V.:
2020,
Physics of magnetohydrodynamic Rossby waves in the sun.
Astrophys. J.
896
,
141.
DOI
.
Gachechiladze et al. (2019)
Gachechiladze, T.,
Zaqarashvili, T.V.,
Gurgenashvili, E.,
Rameshvili, G.,
Carbonell, M.,
Oliver, R.,
Ballester, J.L.
2019,
Magneto-Rossby waves in the solar tachocline and the annular variations in solar activity.
Astrophys. J.
874
,
162.
DOI
.
Horstmann et al. (2023)
Horstmann, G.,
Mamatsashvili, G.,
Giesecke, A.,
Zaqarashvili, T.V.,
Stefani, F.:
2023,
Tidally forced planetary waves in the tachocline of solar-like stars.
Astrophys. J.
944
,
48.
DOI
.
Hung (2007)
Hung, C.-C.:
2007,
Apparent relations between solar activity and solar tides caused by
the planets.
NASA/TM-2007-214817.
Klevs, Stefani, and Jouve (2023)
Klevs, M.,
Stefani, F.,
Jouve, L.:
2023,
A synchronized two-dimensional
α
−
Ω
\alpha-\Omega
model of the solar dynamo.
Solar Phys.
,
298
,
90.
DOI
.
Marquez-Artavia, Jones, and Tobias (2017)
Marquez-Artavia, X.,
Jones, C.A.,
Tobias, S.M.:
2017,
Rotating magnetic shallow water waves and instabilities in a sphere.
Geophys. Astrophys. Fluid Dyn.
111
,
282.
DOI
.
McIntosh, Thompson, and Willock (1992)
McIntosh, P.S.,
Thompson, R.J.,
Willock, E.C.:
1992,
A 600-day periodicity in solar
coronal holes.
Nature
360
,
322.
DOI
.
Okhlopkov (2016)
Okhlopkov, V.P.:
2016,
The gravitational influence of Venus, the Earth, and Jupiter on the
11-year cycle of solar activity.
Mosc. Univ. Phys. B.
71
,
440.
DOI
.
Raphaldini et al. (2019)
Raphaldini, B.,
Teruya, A.S.,
Raupp, C.F.M.,
Bustamante, M.D.:
2019,
Nonlinear Rossby wave-wave and wave-mean flow theory for long-term solar cycle modulations.
Astrophys. J.
887
,
1.
DOI
.
Rossby (1939)
Rossby, C.-G.:
1939,
Relation between variations in the intensity of the zonal circulation of the atmosphere and the displacements of the semi-permanent centers of action.
J. Mar. Res.
2
,
38–55,
Rouillard and Lockwood (2004)
Rouillard, A.,
Lockwood, M.:
2004,
Oscillations in the open solar magnetic flux with a period of
1.68 years: imprint on galactic cosmic rays and implications for
heliospheric shielding.
Ann. Geophys.
22
,
4381.
DOI
.
Scafetta (2012)
Scafetta, N.:
2012,
Does the Sun work as a nuclear fusion amplifier of planetary tidal
forcing? A proposal for a physical mechanism based on the mass-luminosity relation.
J. Atmos. Sol.-Terr. Phys.
81-82
,
27.
DOI
.
Scafetta (2022)
Scafetta, N.,
Bianchini, A.,
2022,
The planetary theory of solar activity variability: A review.
Front. Astron. Space Sci.
9
,
937930.
DOI
.
Stefani et al. (2016)
Stefani, F.,
Giesecke, A.,
Weber, N.,
Weier, T.:
2016,
Synchronized helicity oscillations: a link between planetary tides and the solar cycle?
Solar Phys.
291
,
2197.
DOI
.
Stefani, Giesecke, and Weier (2019)
Stefani, F.,
Giesecke, A.,
Weier, T.:
2019,
A model of a tidally synchronized solar dynamo.
Solar Phys.
294
,
60.
DOI
.
Stefani et al. (2020)
Stefani, F.,
Giesecke, A.,
Seilmayer, M.,
Stepanov, R.,
Weier, T.:
2020a,
Schwabe, Gleissberg, Suess-de Vries: Towards a consistent model of planetary synchronization of solar cycles.
Magnetohydrodynamics
,
56
,
269.
DOI
.
Stefani, Stepanov, and Weier (2021)
Stefani, F.,
Stepanov, W.,
Weier, T.:
2021,
Shaken and stirred: When Bond meets Suess-de Vries and
Gnevyshev-Ohl.
Solar Phys.
296
,
88.
DOI
.
Stefani et al. (2024)
Stefani, F.,
Horstmann, G.M.,
Mamatsashvili, G.,
Weier, T.:
2024,
Rieger, Schwabe, Suess-de Vries: The sunny beats of resonance.
Solar Phys.
299
,
51.
DOI
.
Stefani et al. (2025)
Stefani, F.,
Horstmann, G.M.,
Mamatsashvili, G.,
Weier, T.:
2025,
Adding further pieces to the synchronization puzzle: QBO, bimodality, and phase jumps.
Solar Phys.
300
,
110.
DOI
.
Stefani et al. (2026)
Stefani, F.,
Horstmann, G.M.,
Mamatsashvili, G.,
Weier, T.:
2026,
Tidal triggers and the predictability of solar activity.
Astrophys. J.
in press
,
arXiv:2602.11227.
Tan et al. (2025)
Tan, B.,
Zhang, Y.,
Huang, J.,
Ji, K.:
2025,
The occurrence of powerful flares stronger than X10 class in solar
cycles.
Astrophys. J. Lett.
979
,
L16.
DOI
.
Valdeéz-Galicia, Pérez-Enríquz, and Otaola (1996)
Valdés-Galicia, J.F.,
Pérez-Enríquz, R.,
Otaola, J.A.
1996,
The cosmic-ray 1.68-year variation: A clue to understand the nature of the solar cycle?
Solar Phys.
167
,
409.
Velasco Herrera et al. (2018)
Velasco Herrera, V.M.,
Pérez-Peraza, J.,
Soon, W.,
 Márquez-Adame , J.C.:
2018,
The quasi-biennial oscillation of 1.7 years in ground level enhancement
events.
New Astron.
60
,
7-18.
DOI
.
Velasco Herrera et al. (2026)
Velasco Herrera, V.M.,
Velasco Herrera, G,
Soon, W.,
Özgüc, A.,
Babynets, N.,
Tlatov, A,
Svanda, M.,
Qiu, S.,
Baliunas, S.,
Kotan, B,
Gonzalez Gonzalez, G.,
Bautista Flores, L.A.,
Pazos, M.:
2026,
A New Method for Probabilistic Spatiotemporal Forecasts of Solar Soft
X-Ray “S-Class” (¿X10) Superflares.
J. Geophys. Res. - Space Phys.
131
,
e2025JA034977.
DOI
.
Wilson (2013)
Wilson, I.R.G.:
2013,
The Venus-Earth-Jupiter spin-orbit coupling model.
Pattern Recogn. Phys.
1
,
147.
Zaqarashvili (2010a)
Zaqarashvili, T.,
Carbonell, M.,
Oliver, R.,
Ballester, J.L.:
2010a,
Quasi-biennial oscillations in the solar tachocline caused by magnetic Rossby wave instabilities .
Astrophys. J. Lett.
724
,
L95-L98.
DOI
.
Zaqarashvili (2010b)
Zaqarashvili, T.,
Carbonell, M.,
Oliver, R.,
Ballester, J.L.:
2010b,
Magnetic Rossby waves in the solar tachocline and Rieger-type
periodicities.
Astrophys. J.
709
,
749.
DOI
.
Zaqarashvili (2018)
Zaqarashvili, T.:
2018,
Equatorial magnetohydrodynamic shallow water waves in the solar tachocline.
Astrophys. J.
856
,
32.
DOI
.
Zaqarashvili et al. (2021)
Zaqarashvili, T.,
Albekioni, M.,
Ballester, J.L.,
Bekki, Y.,
Biancofiero, L.,
Birch, A.C.,
Dikpati, M.,
Gizon, L.,
Gurgenashvili, E.,
Heifetz, E.,
Lanca, A.F.,
McIntosh, S.W.,
Ofman, L.,
Oliver, R.,
Proxauf, B.,
Umurhan, O.M.,
Yellin-Bergovoy, R.,
2021,
Rossby waves in astrophysics.
Space Sci. Rev.
217
,
15.
DOI
.
\make@ao
\writelastpage
\lastpagegivenfalse
\inarticlefalse
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA